Earlier today , Thailand 's Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra formally dissolved the country 's parliament and called for new elections .
The new elections are scheduled to take place on February 2 of next year .
Earlier today , a protest with estimated 100,000 to 150,000 people participating promised to storm Government House of Thailand where Shinawatra 's office is located .
The protest included all members of the parliament 's opposition parties .
Democrat Party Leader Abhisit Vejjajiva told CNN , `` I think the best way for the Prime Minister to show responsibility is by returning power to the people '' .
He , other opposition leaders , and demonstrators want an unelected `` people 's council . ''
The country has had several weeks of protests leading up to Shinawatra 's decision .
Five people died in one protest on November 30 .
Demonstrators have connected Shinawatra with her brother and former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra .
Thaskin currently lives abroad and has not returned home because of a corruption conviction that could result in a two-year prison sentence .
Shinawatra 's party had tried and failed to pass legislation granting amnesty to Thaksin .
The probe discovered evidence of hundreds of thousands of pounds going towards shares in weapons firms like BAE Systems and alcohol company Diageo .
It is also alleged to have pledged upwards of # 3 million into tobacco firms .
Ethical fund manager Helen Wildsmith told Panorama : `` If people who 've been giving them money , after watching the television , next year think twice and do n't give that money , because they 're concerned about their investment policy , then that could be argued to be a breach of fiduciary duty .
Comic Relief was founded in 1985 , and since then has taken in nearly # 1 billion in donations .
A spokesperson for the charity told the British newspaper The Daily Telegraph : `` We put the money into large managed funds , as many other leading charities and pension funds do .
On balance , we believe this is the approach that will deliver the greatest benefits to the most vulnerable people . ''
The controversial investments were made between 2007 and 2009 , Panorama explains .
Peter Bennett-Jones , former chair of the company , defended the investments in a post on The Guardian 's website .
He said : `` The Charity Commission guidance is quite clear that trustees must invest for the best possible financial return , while taking a level of risk appropriate for money in their care .
This sounds counterintuitive , but it is the law . ''
Fernanda Lima , who has no previous connection to football or sport prior to her involvement as a FIFA 2014 World Cup presenter , appeared on stage wearing a gold dress with a plunging neckline and matching heels .
She stood alongside secretary general of FIFA Jérôme Valcke , Blatter and soccer greats including Uruguayan Alcides Ghiggia during the draw .
FIFA claims they were not involved in the selection of Lima 's attire .
Casey Stoney , who was captain of the English women 's football team in the last Olympics told the Sunday Telegraph : `` Giving the job to a model has sent out completely the wrong message .
BBC broadcaster Jacqui Oatley , the first woman to be a Match of the Day commentator for the network , is quoted by the Sunday Telegraph as saying , `` What a missed opportunity .
Christiano Jorge Santos , a Sao Paulo state prosecutor , announced prior to the draw he planned an investigation into FIFA and event organizer GEO Eventos following the related accusations of racism stemming from the selection of Lima as a presenter .
Suggestions were made that Lima was chosen because she was white .
The British government announced today that marriages in England and Wales between members of the same-sex will be conducted from March 29 of next year .
The change follows the passage of the Marriage -LRB- Same Sex Couples -RRB- Act earlier this year .
The equalities minister Maria Miller said : `` Marriage is one of our most important institutions , and from 29 March 2014 it will be open to everyone , irrespective of whether they fall in love with someone of the same sex or opposite sex .
This is just another step in the evolution of marriage and I know that many couples up and down the country will be hugely excited that they can now plan for their big day and demonstrate their love and commitment to each other by getting married . ''
The government have not given details of how couples already in a civil partnership will be able to convert to a marriage .
The government are also working on arrangements for those who wish to change their legally recognised gender while married .
Miller said arrangements on both of these issues would be in place by the end of 2014 .
Wednesday was the first of three days for the body of former South African President Nelson Mandela to lie in state at the Union Buildings in Pretoria , at the same amphitheatre where he was inaugurated on May 10 , 1994 .
The amphitheatre was renamed The Nelson Mandela Amphitheatre , by President Jacob Zuma at the Mandela memorial service held in FNB Stadium in Soweto on Tuesday .
The weather for the memorial service on Tuesday was inclement , as the day was filled with rain and cold wind .
There were logistical `` glitches '' in ferrying the public to the stadium which resulted in long waiting times .
A less than expected attendance by the public resulted in a partially filled stadium .
Some sections of the crowd were heard booing the state president Jacob Zuma when his image appeared on the stadium screen , prompting the program director Cyril Ramaphosa to call for discipline amongst the crowd .
The discovery that the sign language interpreter was actually signing `` rubbish '' has since caused uproar in the deaf communities of South Africa and around the world .
US president Barack Obama and Mbuso Mandela both received the loudest cheer and standing ovation as they each delivered their tributes .
The GCIS has advised that tight security measures will be taken in Qunu Eastern Cape Province where Nelson Mandela is to be buried .
No members of the public or Media are to be allowed near the home stead .
The body of the former state man lay in state through yesterday .
The former state man is to be laid to rest amongst his ancestors tomorrow .
At a meeting of the Council of Australian Governments yesterday leaders of the Australian states and territories agreed to a deal with Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott which would delegate more environmental decision-making powers to the states and territories about projects that might affect the environment .
The `` one-stop shops '' policy would mean that the states would do more of the assessments for projects with the intention that eventually some states would have the full authority to make the decisions .
Abbott described them as follows : `` Under those assessment bilaterals the states will do all the assessment work and we hope that in the not-too-distant future we will have approvals bilaterals in place which will mean the states will not only do the assessment but will also do the approvals . ''
All of the states and territories signed memoranda of understanding with the federal government on the issue of environmental regulation .
Tony Abbott argued it would not harm the environment and the `` same high standards of environmental approval '' would be used , but decisions would be quicker .
The Australian government would still hold the power of veto over projects they deem environmentally problematic .
The Australian Green Party has condemned the policy .
Senator Larissa Waters , environment spokeswoman for the Greens , told reporters : `` These deals pave the way for Tony Abbott to abolish a 30-year-old federal safeguard for our most precious natural places and wildlife , established when Bob Hawke stepped in to save the Franklin from being dammed -LSB- ... -RSB- Labor governments in South Australia , Tasmania and the ACT are trashing Bob Hawke 's legacy and contradicting federal Labor 's position '' .
During the interview , Ford is alleged to have made an insinuation of Dale based upon an incident that took place on May 2 , 2012 .
In describing the incident , Ford said , `` I have little kids .
In an editorial posted to the Toronto Star website , Dale says `` I 'm a non-confrontational guy , and I just wanted to write articles and go home .
I did n't want to be goaded into a legal battle that could last a long time . ''
A statement issued by ZoomerMedia , owners of VisionTV , states they will not be making further comment until such time as they are able to speak to their attorneys , as there is now a threat of legal action .
The office of the Mayor has not responded to a request from Wikinews for comment in the matter .
In a landmark decision , the High Court unanimously ruled the term `` marriage '' in Section 51 -LRB- xxi -RRB- of the Constitution of Australia did indeed include marriages between people of the same sex .
However , the Commonwealth Marriage Act 1961 does not permit or recognise same-sex marriages .
Section 109 of the Constitution says when a law is inconsistent with a law of the Commonwealth , the latter prevails .
The High Court therefore struck down the ACT legislation in its entirety , ruling it was wholly inconsistent with the Commonwealth law .
Some 31 same-sex couples were married under the law in the five days from when it became effective last Saturday , December 7 , and when the High Court struck it down on Thursday .
Prime Minister Tony Abbott said they knew this was a possibility .
The ACT Legislative Assembly legalised same-sex marriages in October .
The Commonwealth Government challenged the law in the High Court promptly once passed .
Glasgow -- Last weekend , December 8 , The Reid Foundation , a left-leaning think-tank , launched The Common Weal , a vision for a more socially just and inclusive post-Independence Scotland .
Five - to six-hundred turned up for the event , billed as '' -LSB- a -RSB- ` revolution ' ... with T-shirts and dancing '' by the Sunday Herald , and held in The Arches club and theatre , under Glasgow 's Central Street Station .
Politics , and the launch of the movement 's logo , then took more of a back-seat ; the rest of the event more in-keeping with having a party , and the festive decorations elsewhere around the city centre .
Godley , and fellow Scottish joker Bruce Morton , provided more barbed comedy .
Singer Karine Polwart encouraged the crowd to sing along to a song she said was written on her way to the party , and Actor Tam Dean Burn read a speech from the 16th century Scottish play `` Satire of the three estates '' -- given by the character John Common Weal , representing the common man -- where the deeds and behaviour of the ruling classes are such that , if done by a common man , they 'd be hanged .
Scotland 's Independence referendum is to take place next year , September 18 .
This was a repeated election pledge of the Scottish National Party -LRB- SNP -RRB- -- who moved from leading a minority government , to an outright majority in the devolved parliament 's 2011 general election -- making good on their promise by announcing in January 2011 their intent to hold the referendum in autumn 2014 .
The question being put to the electorate is : `` Should Scotland be an independent country ? ''
A `` Yes '' vote would be followed with negotiations to bring to an end the early eighteenth-century ` Union of the Parliaments ' .
The SNP has proposed Scotland retain Elizabeth II as head of state , a position she holds on the basis of the century-earlier Union of the Crowns .
More known for theatre , live music , and club nights , organisers in The Arches confirmed around 800 had signed up for the free Sunday afternoon event .
The crowd was a mix of all ages , including families with young childen .
Stuart Braithwaite of Mogwai entertained the early arrivals by DJ-ing until the launch video for the Common Weal was screened .
The Common Weal present themselves as `` an emerging movement which is developing a vision for economic and social development in Scotland which is distinct and different from the political orthodoxy that dominates politics and economics in London . ''
Contrasting current `` me first politics '' against concerns of ordinary Scots , the launch video 's opening , monochrome half , stresses everyday common concerns : `` Will I have a pension I can survive on when I retire ? ''
, `` I miss my local library '' , `` Public transport is so bad it 's hard to get to work '' ; and , `` Why can we always find money to bail out banks but not to protect public services ? ''
, `` Why is it always the poor , the disabled , and immigrants who get the blame ? ''
The preferred vision offered by the Common Weal , `` Not me first , all of us first '' , makes up the more-aspirational second-half of the film , advocating a national fund for industry , taking the nation 's energy into collective ownership , building quality new public housing , strengthening the welfare state , and ending tax evasion .
Throughout the event a distinction between these ` popular politics ' , which experience wide support , and the derogatory ` populist ' label , often used to dismiss such calls for a fairer society , was emphasised .
Comedienne Janey Godley took over following the film , to compère the afternoon , and introduce Reid Foundation director Robin McAlpine .
With the mixed audience , Godley made avoiding profanity -- due to the presence of children -- a theme of her warm-up ; although , the humour remained fairly adult in nature .
McAlpine sketched out the movement 's hopes and plans .
It 's become a thing people do as a profession , and the rest of us are all supposed to applaud them -- or stand back -- nod our heads every four years , and be glad for it . ''
On discussions around the country , he claimed that `` across Scottish politics , -LSB- ... -RSB- the people that want this , ... ` me first ' politics , there 's not many of them .
The people that want Common Weal politics , all of us first politics , I 'm meeting them everywhere .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Everyone I meet wants this , a decent politics that puts people first .
-LSB- ... -RSB- We wanted to find a way to communicate an idea of a politics which work for all the people who those politics seek to govern , not just a few of them .
Crediting the Sunday Herald newspaper for an opportunity to share some ideas underpinning the Common Weal , McAlpine was scathing in his criticism of mainstream coverage of the independence debate : `` There 's this massive debate .
And , we 'll all debate things that nobody really cares about , interminably , until they all go away for good . ''
On the current political debate , he remarked : `` If mainstream politics fails to recognise what is really going on in Scotland just now , then that is its problem .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Someone is going to offer ordinary people what they want , and when they do , everything will change . ''
Urging the crowd to get involved , he said : `` If we can create a popular politics , that ordinary people care about , and talk about , and work -LSB- s -RSB- , we can take a grip of Scotland .
He concluded , `` It genuinely is time for a politics that puts all of us first . ''
Whyte explained they hoped the simple image would come to represent the `` all of us first '' philosophy , and `` a new way of doing things '' .
The proceedings were filed in response to comments made in a televised discussion with Conrad Black on the VisionTV program `` theZoomer '' on December 9 , in which Ford allegedly insinuated pedophilia by Dale .
On Monday , Dale announced he intended to proceed with a statement of claim after Ford failed to respond to the libel notice in a timely manner .
While many officials anticipated the flu season to peak in January , it has seemingly arrived much earlier in many parts of the state .
Health officials are urging citizens to seek care with their primary doctors , instead of their local hospital emergency rooms .
They also recommend that everyone over age six months receive a flu vaccination .
Thus far in December , over 450 cases of influenza have been reported in just a small portion of central Texas .
Four recent deaths are being blamed on a flu-like illness .
Other citizens are also showing signs of the same unknown condition , health officials said .
A nurse for a Texas school system noted during a media interview , `` The number one prevention for the flu and cold is hand washing , -LSB- from -RSB- little kids -LSB- up to -RSB- big kids . ''
People suffering from the symptoms report fever , and coughing along with headaches and fatigue .
One Texas man told Wikinews , `` I had the flu just a few weeks ago .
Ian Watkins , frontman of Welsh rock group Lostprophets , was sentenced to 29 years in prison yesterday for his involvement in a series of sex-related offences involving children .
He pleaded guilty to offences including attempted rape and sexual assault , conspiracy to rape a child , sexual assault of a child , possession of indecent images of children , and possession of an extreme pornographic image involving sex with an animal .
Watkins had pleaded guilty to the offences along with two others , the mothers of two of the children he abused .
The two women -- who are being kept anonymous to protect the identity of their children -- were jailed for 14 and 17 years respectively .
Mr Justice Royce , in his sentencing remarks , said the actions of the defendants `` plunged new depths of depravity '' .
He also said : `` Any decent person looking at and listening to the material here will experience shock ; revulsion ; anger and incredulity . ''
The sentencing remarks detail text messages sent between Watkins and one of the mothers planning to abuse children , as well as giving the infant in their care methyl amphetamines .
The evidence , according to the judge , `` is a dreadful catalogue of abuse of a previously innocent boy to satisfy your own interests and lusts . ''
In other communications , Watkins planned to turn the life of the other defendant 's child into `` a life of filth '' .
Following his guilty plea but before his sentencing , Watkins discussed his sentencing with a friend via telephone .
The singer told his friend : `` I 'm going to put a statement on -LSB- December -RSB- 18th now just to say it was megalolz , I do n't know what everyone is getting so freaked out about . ''
He also told his friend : `` You know I plead guilty just to avoid a trial , not realising ` Hang on , that makes me look a bit guilty ' but I would never harm anybody . ''
There are also investigations going on by the Independent Police Complaints Commission into how police failed to pick up on Watkins ' activities before 2012 .
Rebel troops under the command of Riek Machar , former vice president of South Sudan , today stated they now control a number of areas of the country including the oil-rich Unity State which borders Sudan .
Government troops are attempting to take back Bor , the capital of the state of Jonglei .
In Juba , reportedly at least 500 people were killed in the last week .
The US military said three US military aircraft -- CV-22 Ospreys -- were attacked by the rebel troops around Bor , and four US soldiers were injured and taken to Nairobi , Kenya for treatment .
At a United Nations facility in Akobo , an attack killed two Indian peacekeepers and at least eleven civilians on Thursday .
World leaders have reacted to the violence .
UN General Secretary Ban Ki-Moon said : `` I demand that all political , military and militia leaders stop hostilities and end the violence against the civilians .
I call on them to do everything in their power to ensure that their followers hear their message loud and clear . ''
In 1954 , Turing died aged 41 from cyanide poisoning .
An inquest found he 'd committed suicide , but some dispute this and believe it was an accident .
His brilliance was put into practice at Bletchley Park during the Second World War where he was pivotal to breaking the Enigma code , helping to end the war and save thousands of lives .
Dr Turing deserves to be remembered and recognised for his fantastic contribution to the war effort and his legacy to science .
Prime Minister David Cameron said : `` Alan Turing was a remarkable man who played a key role in saving this country in World War Two by cracking the German Enigma code .
His action saved countless lives .
As a prerequisite for the peace talks between the Israelis and the Palestinians led by the US , Israel committed in July to free 104 prisoners imprisoned before the Oslo accords .
In this wave , the third out of four , Israel freed 26 Palestinian prisoners out of ` Ofer ' prison in Israel .
Israel confirmed the release on Saturday , but delayed it until Tuesday for an Israeli court appeal by victims ' families to prevent it .
The appeal filed by the ` Almagor ' organization representing the Israeli victims ' families was not accepted .
Addressing the issue , the Israeli Prime Minister , Benjamin Netanyahu , said at the meeting of his party , `` Leadership is judged by the ability to implement decisions , difficult as they may be .
The United States congratulated Israel on the move and a State Department Deputy Spokeswoman , Marie Harf , told Al Jazeera the Secretary of State , John Kerry , expressed `` his appreciation for Prime Minister Netanyahu 's decision to release the third tranche of prisoners -LSB- ... -RSB- The Israeli government 's commitment to release Palestinian prisoners helped enable the start -LSB- ... -RSB- and the continuation of the final status negotiations , and we believe this is a positive step forward in the overall process '' .
Kerry himself is expected to arrive during this week to Israel to promote the peace talks .
Early media reports today indicate experts are predicting a massive blizzard to hit the northeastern United States late this evening .
Such storms , coloquially called `` Nor'easter s '' , often wreak havoc across cities and smaller towns .
The storm itself may ultimately stretch across 22 states , potentially effecting about one-third of the country 's population .
The city of New York came under a winter storm warning late yesterday evening , with nine inches of snow predicted to fall .
Sources also indicate Long Island may experience wind chills as severe as 10 below zero Fahrenheit -LRB- about 23 below zero Celsius -RRB- .
Boston schools were reportedly closed for tomorrow , though the press secretary for Boston 's mayor had earlier , regarding braving cold weather , described New Englanders as `` hardy '' .
By 2pm today Chicago O'Hare airport had experienced 592 flight cancellations .
Many homeless shelters across the Northeast region are expected to be filled to capacity or beyond .
Weather officials have speculated that next week , parts of Wisconsin could experience the coldest temperatures in nearly seventeen years , since February 1996 .
The 71-year-old died this morning at at 4:30 am Portuguese time -LRB- 0430 UTC -RRB- in Lisbon of a heart attack .
Eusébio da Silva Ferreira , known at the Black Panther , scored 41 goals in 64 appearances for the Portuguese men 's national football team , was voted the best player in the world in 1965 , and won the World Cup Golden Boot in 1966 after scoring nine goals .
An avalanche near Vail , Colorado trapped four people Tuesday , killing one person later identified as Anthony `` Tony '' Seibert , and injuring the other three .
Anthony Seibert was the grandson of Peter Seibert Sr. , who with Earl Eaton around 1960 cofounded the resort area in the backcountry that would become part of the Vail Ski Resort .
The Eagle County Coroner reported the avalanche happened around 11:30 A.M. local time -LRB- 1830 UTC -RRB- in an area known as the East Vail Chutes , near the ski resort of Vail .
Spencer Logan of the Colorado Avalanche Information Center said the area is locally known as dangerous , having already killed two people in 2008 .
The other three have been found and reported to have suffered nonfatal injuries , walking away from the incident without needing hospital care .
The Colorado Avalanche Information Center reports five fatalities this season , including another in Colorado on December 31 , on Parkview Mountain west of Willow Creek Pass , and a snowmobiler in Big Sky , Montana on New Year 's Day .
A friend of the Seibert family , Scott Klumb , told CNN Seibert 's death reminds people `` to be careful in the backcountry -LSB- ... -RSB- As exciting as it may look , you have to take the proper precautions . ''
Peter Seibert Sr. was renowned in the skiing business as , among other roles , the first president of Vail Associates , which he helped make one of the largest and most popular ski resorts in the US .
Nauru 's Government Information Office Director Joanna Olsson appeared to be unaware that the new visa fee had yet to take effect , writing an email to a visa applicant about the new fee last Tuesday : `` Sorry for the late response but yes we are granting media visas .
She also claimed the new fee had been implemented `` a couple -LSB- of -RSB- months ago '' , The Sydney Morning Herald reported .
On the contrary , on Thursday during a meeting , Nauru 's Principal Immigration Officer Ernest Stephen said the price change was `` not official '' and the price rise had not yet passed into law through the Parliament .
Stephen said only three or four Nauru media visas were granted last year .
`` They -LSB- the Nauru authorities -RSB- certainly bully our local media in terms of what they can show , who they can interview , and this is another illustration of that kind of behaviour in terms of bullying media and avoiding accountability .
... This hiking up of fees for journalists coming in to Nauru is a step in that direction , and we think that it 's the wrong move and we 're certainly opposing it . ''
These conditions are aggravated by noise and dust from the construction of the permanent facility .
The UNHCR has also cited delays processing the refugee applications , lack of legal counseling , health issues including trauma and mental health cases , and responsibility of both Australia and Nauru for the treatment .
In another review in November last year , UHCR reported improved physical conditions while criticizing progress on reception conditions and refugee applications processing .
Ariel Sharon , the former Prime Minister of Israel , died today at the Sheba Medical Center just outside Tel Aviv after his conditioned worsened significantly over the last few days .
Sharon had been in a coma since suffering a stroke in January 2006 .
Sharon was elected to the Knesset in 1973 , then took a number of ministerial roles in the government including as a security adviser to Yitzhak Rabin , terms as minister of agriculture , defence , trade and industry , construction and housing , and national infrastructure .
In 2005 , Sharon left the Likud Party to form Kadima and pursued a policy of unilateral disengagement .
Sharon was married twice : his first wife Margalit died in 1962 , his second wife Lily died in 2000 .
The Royal Australian Navy towed back arriving asylum seekers to Rote Island , Indonesia , after claiming Christmas Island destination , Indonesian National Police reported Monday of last week .
Last Thursday , Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott supported lack of transparency on the issue .
Indonesian police found the two ships reportedly forcibly towed back from Australia on December 19 , and on January 6 after being towed on New Year 's Day .
A self-identified Sudanese asylum seeker from one of the boats reported the Navy ship numbers , identifying them as HMAS Parramatta and HMAS Glenelg , and said the refugees were denied access to navigation tools during the duration of the route and abandoned in sea in the middle of the night .
Commenters called such practice `` push-backs '' , `` tow-backs '' , `` turn-backs '' .
Police chief Hidayat Rote Island , speaking to Fairfax Media , said the second boat was adrift : `` They were rescued by the locals , because the boat engines were dead .
Australian government originally had no response , but after protests by Labor and the Greens , Tony Abbott commented .
I 'm pleased to say that it 's now several weeks since we 've had a boat , and the less we talk about operational details on the water , the better when it comes to stopping the boats . ''
Indonesian National Armed Forces chief General Moeldoko said according to the Jakarta Post , and an Australian Defence Force spokesperson confirmed , that they agreed on the push-backs approach mid-December with no further comment ; with Mr Abbot calling the relationship `` very strong '' , while Indonesia 's legal and security affairs minister Djoko Suyanto and foreign affairs minister Marty Natalegawa both disapproved of the approach .
General Moeldoko reportedly later said the media had misreported him .
The United Nations Refugee Agency -LRB- UNRA -RRB- was seeking explanation from the Australian government , it reported in a press briefing this Saturday .
The UNRA spokesperson , Babar Baloch , raised legal concerns by saying that `` Any such approach would raise significant issues and potentially could place Australia in breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention and international law .
If people who are in need for international protection seek a country 's safety , then they must be allowed to go through a process which helps to determine if these people are in need . ''
A spokesperson for the Australian Assistant Minister for Infrastructure and Regional Development , Warren Truss , announced plans this week to close four mainland immigration detention facilities -- Scherger , at RAAF Scherger , Queensland ; Leonora , in Leonora , Western Australia ; Port Augusta , in Port Augusta , South Australia ; and Inverbrackie facilities in Woodside , the Adelaide Hills , South Australia -- by the end of February .
The detainees would be relocated to other detention centres .
Pontville detention facility , in Pontville , Tasmania , was empty and would also be closed .
In a statement , Australian Immigration Minister Scott Morrison referred to recent border protection practices to justify the decision .
On Tuesday , he told PM radio , `` This Government is taking control of our borders , which enables us to shut mainland detention centres down in Australia .
This will save taxpayers around $ 89 million a year and it 's the first down-payment on the dividend of stronger border protection .
He also noted that the Pontville and Scherger detention facilities would be returned to the Defence Department .
The local mayor near the Pontville detention centre , Tony Foster , said the centre was opened only three years ago and revived the local economy .
Foster also complained about the short notice from the new federal government elected last year .
He cited recent centre upgrade costs of $ 15 million , estimated the number of local small businesses serving the centre between 45 and 48 , and said he would explore the option of converting it to a `` corrections facility for 18 to 24 year olds '' with the relevant state and Commonwealth officials .
Scott Donaghy , who runs the Brighton 's Best Bakehouse business in Brighton , said `` Staff members come in for breakfast , coffee , lunch , having a meeting .
Not only were they coming in but there was more money coming into the general area from wages and people living here .
I 'm disappointed at the fact that another employer is gone from the area . ''
A pharmacist-in-charge at Brighton Discount Drug Store also commented , saying that staff members from the detention centre came to Brighton for lunch and shopping .
The announcement follows controversial reports of wrecked refugee boats found near Indonesian shores by the local police .
The refugees had reported being towed back from Australia by the Australian Navy , which had originally deceptively claimed Christmas Island as the refugees ' destination .
The Daily Mail and Mirror were back in court the next year for their coverage of a trial involving serial killer Levi Bellfield .
The two papers were again fined after Dominic Grieve told the High Court in London of an `` avalanche '' of `` seriously prejudicial '' stories .
The papers published their stories after Bellfield was convicted of abducting and murdering schoolgirl Milly Dowler .
The trial was not yet over , however , as the jury was still considering an additional charge relating to another alleged attempted abduction .
That charge was dropped because of news coverage .
The BBC College of Journalism notes the differences . ''
Scottish judges consider it contempt to publish pictures of the accused . ''
Despite this , many sources , including the BBC , have named a person detained by police and published their photograph .
The BBC did this online , in addition to naming the detained individual on Radio 4 .
Our correspondent is based in Scotland and has been advised by a lawyer not to identify anybody detained until they have appeared in court , even if they have been arrested and charged .
The Contempt of Court Act 1981 is designed to prevent prejudicial material going in front of juries before trial .
Although UK-wide legislation , the law is interpreted differently north of the border than in England and Wales .
The BBC College of Journalism advises Scottish legal advice be sought before publishing images of the accused .
Channel 4 's Producer 's Handbook notes `` the law has tended to be interpreted more strictly in Scotland '' but does not advise on how so .
Images of arrested persons in high-profile cases are often published in cases south of the border .
Channel 4 is also amongst organisations to have named the detained person and put an image of them online .
Police announced last night that a body believed to be the missing child had been found in Fife and that an individual had been detained .
The boy had been missing since Thursday morning although there was a possible sighting of him then .
Hundreds of volunteers have assisted police searching the Scottish capital for the boy .
The Sun , which had offered a # 25,000 reward , named the person in an article on their website that included a photo .
Both the photo and identifying information appeared on their homepage .
The articles rank amongst the most-read items on many of the news websites .
Unlike in England and Wales , where only the Attorney General can prosecute contempt of this sort , in Scotland the media organisations can be charged by an accused person .
Wikinewsies in Scotland have noted remarks made about the named person 's alleged wrongdoing on public transport and Facebook , suggesting widespread knowledge of their identity .
Several of the organisations involved are no stranger to being prosecuted for contempt over cases in neighbouring England .
In 2011 The Sun and The Daily Mail were successfully prosecuted for contempt by Attorney General Dominic Grieve after they published a photo of a murder defendant posing with a gun .
The case did not involve firearms and Grieve spoke of `` seriously impeded or prejudiced '' proceedings if any jurors saw the photos .
The trial was not stopped as the photo was removed from circulation before the jury saw it and the defendant was found guilty .
In 2011 The Sun and Mirror were fined for reporting negatively about an arrested suspect in the high-profile Jo Yeates murder investigation .
Jeffries also pursued libel action against a number of publications .
Politicians subsequently considered a law banning the naming of arrested persons who have not been charged throughout the UK as a direct result of this case .
On Friday , an uncommon cold weather system which dipped far into southern Texas created major transportation problems for sections of the state .
The major cold weather system stretched from central Texas , eastward to Houston and southward to Galveston , a gulf region not accustomed to such cold snaps .
Nearly all sections of Interstate Highway-35 from San Antonio to Austin , a span of about 75 miles , were closed on Friday morning .
Traffic was moving at approximately 5 miles per hour around mid-day on adjacent access roads .
A Texas man told Wikinews it took him about three times longer-than-usual to drive from San Antonio to Austin due to weather condition and the closed highway .
Schools in Houston closed Thursday at 4:00 pm and remained closed on Friday .
Many businesses in Houston also closed on Friday .
Huntsville , a city in the deep part of southeast Texas , received 2 inches of snow .
On Twitter , Yatsenyuk told the President : `` No deal ... we 're finishing what we started .
Protests started in November of last year after the Ukrainian government decided to reject a free trade deal with the European Union and build stronger ties with Russia .
Following the rejection of the EU deal , the Russian government has bought US$ 15 billion of Ukrainian government bonds and given a discount on gas supplies from Russia , cutting the price from over $ 400 per 1,000 cubic metres of gas to $ 268.50 .
The right-wing Ukrainian politician Oleh Tyahnybok said at the time President Yanukovych had `` pawned whole sectors '' of the Ukrainian economy to Russia .
Russian president Vladimir Putin has called the protests in Ukraine the work of `` very well prepared and trained militant groups '' .
Putin said : `` This is an attempt to shake the current and , I want to emphasise , legitimate authorities in the country . ''
On November 30 , riot police detained protesters and allegedly used violence against them .
In December , a statue of Vladimir Lenin was brought down by protesters .
Protesters have claimed that after being arrested , they have been tortured by police including being beaten , forced to strip naked .
The Tunisian National Assembly approved a new constitution yesterday , a step towards running elections in the country .
A new cabinet has been appointed by the Prime Minister , Mehdi Jomaa .
The constitution recognises Islam as the religion of Tunisia but also includes provisions guaranteeing freedom of conscience and equality between men and women .
The struggle between Islamism and secularism has been a recurring theme in Tunisian politics since the Arab Spring uprising three years ago : as in Egypt , Salafists have sought to push the country towards embracing sharia law and other hard-line Islamist policies .
Last year , the ruling Ennahda party agreed to step down after their political opponents said their government had not done enough to seek justice for the assassination of opposition politicians by Islamist militants .
Thursday morning , members of the Parliament of New South Wales , Australia , discussed drafts of two bills relating to liquor intoxication assault crimes starting at 10 o'clock in the morning -LRB- AEDT ; 2100 UTC -RRB- , and approved them later during the day : the Lower House approved at midday and the Upper House at 7pm .
The new legislation imposes harsher penalties on behaviour under alcohol influence , and a set of other restrictions in the Sydney central business district -LRB- CBD -RRB- .
The parties , while actively discussing the draft , did not support amendments raised during the discussion and the bill passed more quickly than usual , on the same day .
However , Greens Member of Parliament -LRB- MP -RRB- John Kaye did n't support the bills , naming some issues he did n't expect the bill to address but found more important , such as `` the dangerous promotions of deep discounting of alcohol , the failure to enforce responsible service of alcohol in venues and excessive liquor outlet density '' .
One provision defined a new offense , assault causing death while intoxicated -- by alcohol or other drugs -- with an eight-year non-parole period .
The penalty notice fines for misconduct and swearing in public were raised from AU$ 200 and $ 150 to $ 500 , while the maximum fine for `` continuation of intoxicated and disorderly behaviour following move on direction '' -- direction `` to leave a public place and not return for a specified period '' -- was increased from 6 penalty units -LRB- $ 660 -RRB- to 15 penalty units -LRB- $ 1,650 -RRB- .
The bill was drafted in response to death of 18-year-old teenager named Daniel Christie on January 11 , following eleven days in hospital after allegedly being punched by drunk Shaun McNeil , 25 , at Kings Cross .
He allegedly also attacked Daniel 's brother , Peter ; McNeil 's court case has been adjourned until March .
Tuesday , Hamas announced it was deploying its special rocket-prevention security forces in the Gaza Strip .
Recent reports said Hamas withdrew the force to protest Israeli attacks .
The rocket-prevention force includes 600 Hamas operatives and started its activity after the ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas , during the last escalation between the two in late 2012 .
The force 's job is to prevent rocket shooting from the Gaza Strip to Israel and so to ensure the continuation of the ceasefire between the two .
Lately there has been an escalation in the tension between Hamas and Israel , expressed by Israeli attacks and in rocket shooting from Gaza .
These incidents have raised questions regarding the Egyptian-mediated ceasefire agreement between the sides .
Regarding the force 's return to activity , Islam Shahwan , Hamas interior ministry spokesperson , said his office , in charge of the force 's operation , is acting to `` secure and fortify the home front and the agreements approved by resistance factions to realize our people 's interests , security and stability '' and said in addition , `` We will not allow anyone to break the truce .
This force is meant to protect our internal bloc '' .
However , Israel Defense Forces -LRB- IDF -RRB- spokesperson Major Avichay Adraee told the Xinhua News Agency , `` The army will respond strongly to any rockets coming from Gaza .
He said the IDF holds Hamas responsible for any attacks from Gaza .
The Democrat previously stated she would run for a seat in the United States Congress being vacated by retiring Congressman Henry Waxman .
She will attempt to gain election to the seat currently occupied by Ted Lieu , a Democrat from Torrance , California .
Lieu is currently in the beginning of his own campaign for Congressman Waxman 's seat representing California 's 33rd congressional district .
In a release to the press , Fluke said : `` I am extremely moved by the outpouring of local and national support I have received since I announced that I was considering running for office .
She described her intentions for the California legislature : `` I am committed to continuing that fight in Sacramento , working to protect our environment , ensure our access to health care , and create the jobs that are desperately needed .
Fluke was nominated as a candidate by Time magazine for their Person of the Year of 2012 .
Time concluded Fluke helped give U.S. President Barack Obama an edge in his 2012 presidential re-election campaign .
Fluke was a featured speaker on September 5 , 2012 at the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte , North Carolina .
Fluke spoke to attendees at the convention about the consequences for women of electing Republican candidate for U.S. President Mitt Romney over incumbent President Barack Obama .
Fluke campaigned with President Obama in his bid for re-election .
She was recognized April 22 , 2012 with the Stand Up for Choice Award .
Fluke was given the Stand Up for Choice Award at the `` Third Annual Multi-Generational Brunch '' of the organization NARAL Pro-Choice America which was held in New York City -LRB- NYC -RRB- , New York in the United States .
Fluke received a nomination in March 2012 as a candidate for Time magazine 's 100 most influential people in the world .
The list is released annually as a special edition of Time magazine , titled Time 100 .
She also worked for Sanctuary for Families in NYC which worked to crack down on human trafficking and domestic violence .
A Japan government panel met last Tuesday and is drafting a report aimed to urge Japan to loosen restrictions on participation in military combat -- restriction of military to self-defense -- imposed in its constitution since the end of World War II .
North Korea reacted by calling the Prime Minister of Japan , Shinzo Abe , an `` Asian Hitler '' on Wednesday .
Shinzo Abe said he was motivated to help keep international peace -- by protecting other nations ' troops , which was beyond the scope currently allowed under the constitution .
During the Tuesday meeting , Abe also expressed a concern that the country 's national security was not ready for potential regional conflicts : `` Japan 's preparation for national security threats in the region is not sufficient .
Yousuke Isozaki , a security policy adviser to Mr Abe , said a revised military policy would strengthen Japan 's ties with allies , the US in particular .
The Korean Central News Agency , the official news agency of the North Korean government , commented in an editorial , saying Abe was trying to conjure up fears of North Korea using missiles or nuclear weapons to help justify expanding Japan 's military .
The Korean Central News Agency were likening Abe to Hitler .
The editorial followed a comment by Rodong Sinmun , the ruling party -- Workers ' Party of Korea -- newspaper , which described Abe as a `` militarist maniac '' last month .
The reaction was also inspired by Abe 's visit to Yasukuni Shrine in December .
In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph , land , sea , and air forces , as well as other war potential , will never be maintained .
Last week fifty volunteers , from nine countries covering nineteen languages , spent four days at the European Parliament buildings in Strasbourg photographing and filming members of the parliament -LRB- MEPs -RRB- .
Members of the team , who were all granted guest press accreditation , began arriving at the hotel in the small town of Kork , not far from the France -- Germany border , on Saturday .
Placards on the courtyard wall explain it served as headquarters for Field marshal Kollowrat-Krakowsky battling Napoleonic forces in the 1796 Siege of Kehl .
Those arriving later came directly to the Louise Weiss building , which hosts the parliament 's plenary sessions and all voting on EU matters .
Whilst staying in the hotel , the Wikimedian group met two MEPs who chose it in-preference to dramatically more-expensive Strasbourg accommodation .
One of the ushers from the parliament also chatted with volunteers at the hotel , self-depricatingly describing his ceremonial attire as a `` penguin suit '' due to the long-tailed jacket .
One of the first day 's MEPs to introduce themselves to the visiting Wikimedians was Christian Engström ; delivering copies of his book , The Case for Copyright Reform , co-authored with Swedish Pirate Party founder Rickard Falkvinge .
Engström explained that , in the book , he argues Wikipedia is one of the losers under current copyright legislation .
One of numerous MEPs who recorded video introductions in multiple languages , he was more-confident than some colleagues -- the most-challenging taking thirteen takes to successfully record .
Over 1,000 new , high-quality , photographs were taken and uploaded for use on Wikimedia projects during the visit .
The second and third days in the parliament saw the highest number of MEPs coming to see the visiting Wikimedians and have their photographs taken .
Once photographed , MEPs were encouraged to make video introductions in languages they were comfortable speaking in .
Parliamentarians became more-enthusiastic about the project in its later days , with significantly more turning up to be photographed and filmed .
Given some turned up as Wikimedians were packing up on the last day , some still lack freely-licensed photographs for their Wikipedia entries .
French MEP , and National Front member , Bruno Gollnisch was amongst those disappointed when turning up after much of the equipment was packed up ; although Gollnisch has already provided some video recordings , he had returned with additional prepared texts -- including Japanese -- for use in a video introduction .
Despite much of two levels within the parliament set aside for the press , the event received little coverage from mainstream media .
France TV 's channel three broadcast a report on the Thursday , making footage available via their website on the Friday .
In contrast the Voice intro project -LRB- WikiVIP -RRB- started by Andy Mabbett , and brought to a far-wider audience with Stephen Fry 's endorsement , saw Mabbet give an interview from one of the parliament 's radio studios with United States ' public radio network NPR .
With Fry 's recording catching the attention of the press , that project has received coverage from as-far afield as Italy , Russia , and Japan .
Audio for use on Wikipedia is to be extracted from video recordings of MEPs for use on Wikimedia projects .
As available storage and bandwidth increases , it is a longer-term goal of the Wikimedia Foundation to increase freely-available , and reusable , multimedia content across all projects hosted by the Foundation .
The project also served as an opportunity to emphasise that all Wikimedia content is created through people donating their time and effort .
Whilst MEPs knew anyone could edit Wikipedia , meeting a group representing all ages , and much of Europe , served as an effective public-relations exercise .
Indiana 's Senate passed a proposed constitutional amendment Monday that would ban same-sex marriage in the state 's constitution .
Indiana 's state law already prohibits same-sex marriage .
A sentence banning civil unions was removed from the proposal .
For a constitutional amendment to be approved in Indiana , it must pass both the House of Representatives and the Senate during two separately elected legislatures , which means there has to be an election between the two sets of votes .
The proposed amendment can not be changed from one voting session to another and can not be changed from the House of Representatives to the Senate .
Once the proposed amendment has passed those hurdles , then the amendment goes to Indiana voters who vote yea or nay on the amendment .
The proposed amendment already passed both houses in 2011 .
A change was made this legislative session when the second sentence was deleted first by the House of Representatives and then was passed in a similar form by the Senate Monday .
The failure of the second sentence , which proposes to ban same-sex civil unions , could possibly open the door for civil unions in the future .
Following the process , HJR-3 will be reviewed again by the next elected legislature in either 2015 or 2016 to remain in process .
Indiana Governor Mike Pence supported the proposed amendment .
Pence , in his `` State of the State '' speech for 2014 , said , `` I believe in traditional marriage , and I have long held the view that the people , rather than unelected judges , should decide matters of such great consequence '' .
Pence also called for a civil debate for the matter and to treat everyone with respect .
`` I think the rest of the country is moving towards being more open and accepting about gay marriage , '' Wanden said .
`` I think Indiana , which is a conservative red state , saw this and wanted to resist the changing tide .
Indiana is not the only state that prohibits same-sex marriage by law or as proposed by constitution .
There are 29 other states that prohibit same-sex civil marriages under their constitutions , while Indiana and three other states prohibit it by statute .
The states that allow for some form of same-sex marriage number 17 plus Washington , DC .
At this time , 17 countries allow same-sex marriage , the most recent being Scotland .
Most of the countries that allow same-sex marriage are concentrated in Europe , but there are also countries in South America and Africa , as well as New Zealand , Canada , and parts of Mexico that have legalized same-sex marriage .
Ma'ariv , an Israeli daily newspaper , reports that according to a leaked US document John Kerry , the US Secretary of State , will describe Israel as a Jewish state in the outline document of the peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Authority -LRB- PA -RRB- , despite widespread Palestinian objection .
Moreover , it is noted that the document recognizes Palestine as the state of the Palestinian people .
The document will be presented to Benjamin Netanyahu , the Israeli Prime Minister , during his upcoming visit to the USA next month and is meant to serve as an outline for a future peace agreement between the two sides .
According to The Telegraph , European diplomats fear that the document will be perceived as biased in favor of the Israeli side and therefore the Palestinians will not accept it .
Israel requested the peace agreement include recognition of Israel as a Jewish state .
However , Palestinian authorities say that such recognition will depose five million refugees from ever returning to homes fled following the 1948 establishment of Israel .
In addition , Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas expressed his worries such recognition will hurt the 1.5 million Arab citizens of Israel .
Nabil Shaath , the former Palestinian Foreign Minister , was quoted by The Telegraph telling reporters after the leak `` When you talk about a Jewish state , you are talking about the end of the end of any solution for Palestinian refugees - do you think any Palestinian can accept this ? ''
Shaath also said `` If Mr Kerry thinks this is the sum of his brilliant intelligence , the document will go nowhere .
It 's impossible for the Palestinians to sign such an agreement with Israel . ''
The document , according to the leak , will refer to the borders dispute , which Palestine wants based on the borders before the 1967 Mideast War .
Other topics covered reportedly include the future state of Jerusalem which is sacred to both nations and the Jordan Valley issue .
Israel demands an ongoing military presence in the valley for ten years once an agreement is signed while the PA agrees to leave such presence only for five years .
The Chang ' e 3 lander , the first lunar lander for 37 years and of the third nationality , touched down and launched Jade Rabbit in December .
Jade Rabbit was designed to spend three months seeking out natural resources but has not functioned since a fault was discovered on January 25 .
The probes have to shut down for two weeks each month to survive the `` lunar night '' , during which surface temperature drops to -180 ° C or less .
The first lunar night of the mission was weathered successfully but Chinese scientists suspected the rover had failed on the 25th when the second night rolled in .
Communication could only be attempted when the night ended on Monday , but reactivation efforts failed and the rover is now confirmed derelict .
State-owned Xinhua news agency blamed the fault on `` the complicated lunar surface environment '' .
Only the US and ex-USSR had previously landed rovers on the moon , with China and the States fueling renewed interest in Earth 's natural satellite as a possible source of minerals .
Wikinews has obtained a letter by Scottish Justice Secretary Kenny MacAskill to former Conservative justice spokesman John Lamont in response to questions raised by our correspondent about the Mikaeel Kular murder case .
Wikinews has investigated possible contempt by media publishing potentially prejudicial material , and MacAskill wrote he has `` been following the case of Mikaeel Kular and -LSB- is -RSB- acutely aware of the unusual publicity this case has attracted . ''
Our correspondent is based in Scotland and was been advised by a lawyer not to identify anybody detained until they have appeared in court , even if they have been arrested and charged .
Professor James Chalmers of the University of Glasgow has since reviewed our coverage and confirmed this position .
Despite that a large number of major media outlets identified Rosdeep Adekoya , nee Kular , 33 , as the arrested individual .
Adekoya has since been in Edinburgh Sheriff Court charged with murdering her son .
She is in custody pending indictment and trial , but any eyewitness evidence may be tainted because her image has been widely published .
This is common practice elsewhere in the UK but Scottish justice works differently and courts have viewed publication of photos as potentially prejudicial .
Professor Pamela Ferguson of the University of Dundee notes `` journalists do seem to be walking a dangerous line if publishing photos etc of suspects . ''
Crown Office , which is in overall charge of prosecutions , has indicated to journalists that no further comment will be made at least until indictment .
MacAskill however expressed confidence in the Scottish court system to deal with the situation .
`` I am confident ... the courts themselves will intervene if they believe publicity is in danger of being prejudicial . ''
He also wrote to Lamont that he has faith in the court to successfully direct any jury that may try the case in order to maintain fairness .
Witnesses in Scotland may be asked to identify accused persons standing in the dock .
The BBC College of Journalism advises legal advice be sought ahead of publishing photos and notes it has previously been ruled contempt .
The BBC used the accused 's photo prominently in their own online coverage .
A photograph might do this in a case where identification is an issue ; on the face of it , that does not seem especially likely in this case , but it is impossible to know for certain at this point .
The courts have said that the only safe route to avoid committing a contempt is to avoid publishing a photograph , but that does not mean that publishing a photograph is automatically a contempt . ''
MacAskill noted `` the kind of issue that publicity might raise may become apparent only during the trial itself . ''
In one instance a charge against serial killer Levi Bellfield was dropped owing to publicity while the jury were deliberating ; in another , newspapers were fined and sued for libel over reporting on the arrest of a suspect who turned out to be innocent in a prominent investigation .
A proposal was mooted to ban identification of suspects arrested anywhere in the UK , but this was subsequently shelved .
MacAskill confirmed `` the Scottish Government is content with the way the courts are operating the rules on contempt of court in Scotland at the moment and has no plans to make changes . ''
He also wrote of the difficulties with trying to individually cover all eventualities with prescriptive legislation , saying `` A trial for a sexual offence will raise very different issues -- particularly of protecting victims -- from those that are raised by a tax fraud trial . ''
The National Parks Wildlife Service -LRB- NPWS -RRB- has used aerial culls and baiting to reduce Cocoparra 's goat population , but there are said to be thousands of goats at the reserve .
The feral animals to be hunted in other reserves may include cats , deer , dogs , and pigs , beside goats -- depending on the reserve .
Shooters in the supplementary pest control trial were to be closely supervised by rangers , as the trial was monitored and its effectiveness evaluated .
In a partnership of NPWS and the Sporting Shooters Association of Australia -LRB- NSW -RRB- Inc , qualified volunteers were recruited , under the Sporting Shooters Association 's hunting program .
According to Mick O'Flynn , the Acting Director Park Conservation and Heritage with the NPWS , the four shooters selected for the first shooting operation received comprehensive safety and training instruction .
Following announcement of the close partnership of shooters with NWPS staff , the Greens cancelled planned picketing of the first shooting operation .
However , State Greens MP -LRB- Member of Parliament -RRB- David Shoebridge warned , `` This needs to be a government-run program , not run by the biggest gun lobby group in Australia '' .
Another concern raised by the Greens was the danger of armed people , not only to animals , but also to people visiting the national parks , should the shooters be unsupervised after the trial .
The trial was announced in the second half of 2013 , though the plan has been significantly modified over time and has come to be regulated under the National Parks and Wildlife Act , in contrast with the original proposal of recreational hunting in national parks , as it was announced in May 2012 by New South Wales Premier Barry O'Farrell .
The government needed at least one vote from a Shooters and Fishers Party MP to pass electricity privatisation legislation , as both Labor and Greens opposed it .
O'Farrell 's plans to allow pest control by licensed individuals called for licencing by the Game Council of New South Wales .
The Backbench Business Committee of the House of Commons is to discuss whether to schedule a debate on reform of Britain 's drug laws , after a petition calling for an independent review of the laws reached 100,000 signatures this week .
The petition was started by Green Party MP Caroline Lucas and calls for a cost-benefit analysis and impact assessment for the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 .
Lucas said Britain now spends # 3 billion annually on enforcing drugs policy and an assessment of `` whether Britain 's current approach is value for money or money wasted '' is required .
In England and Wales alone , an estimated # 3 billion a year is spent fighting the war on drugs , to little effect .
Russell Brand -- who has spoken publicly of his use of drugs -- said : `` Almost 2,000 young people die in the UK each year from taking illegal drugs .
But leading police , doctors , and politicians agree prohibition has completely failed to curb addiction . ''
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg stated his support for the review in a newspaper editorial : `` The UK can lead the debate in Europe and Europe can lead the debate in the world .
Piers Morgan , former editor of UK newspaper the Daily Mirror and now an anchor on US-based CNN , was interviewed under caution by UK police as part of an investigation into phone hacking named Operation Golding .
The interview was revealed today but was conducted on December 6 .
He was the sixth journalist from the Mirror Group to be questioned under caution or arrested in connection with allegations of phone hacking .
Neither Trinity Mirror nor CNN have made any statement regarding Morgan 's police questioning .
Morgan gave a statement : `` In early November I was asked to attend an interview by officers from Operation Weeting when I was next in the UK .
In central London , masonry from a building near Holborn tube station fell on top of a car in the street outside , killing a woman and injuring a man in the car .
The woman was pronounced dead on the scene ; the man is recovering in hospital and is reported to be in a stable condition .
A third , female passenger in the car escaped before emergency responders arrived .
Streets have closed in Purley , Oxford , Worcester and Wrexham .
Journeys for drivers using the A29 , A32 , A4113 , A54 , and A57 roads have all been affected .
A 50-foot-hole appeared in the M2 motorway in Kent which led to the closure of a ten mile section of the road .
In the English Channel , an 85-year-old man and a woman in her 70s were airlifted from the cruise ship MS Marco Polo which was hit by a large storm wave on its way back to Tilbury , Essex .
Other passengers aboard the ship suffered minor injuries .
In addition to the two deaths from yesterday 's storms , a 77-year-old man died yesterday from injuries sustained Wednesday in the town of Caernarfon , in Gwynedd , Wales .
Bob Thomas was hospitalised after being hit by a falling tree in his garden .
The Met Office said that after storms this weekend , weather in the UK should return to `` normal winter weather '' next week .
In contrast to the predictions of the Met Office , the Environment Agency have said that floods could remain in some areas of England until March , and that up to 3,000 homes in the Thames Valley could be flooded over the weekend .
On Friday , they raised the number of `` danger to life '' level flood warnings from 17 to 24 .
Flooding across England and Wales has led to thousands being without electricity .
In North Wales , as of Friday 17,000 people had no electricity supply , while 7,000 homes in Cornwall and Devon had their electricity supply cut off by Friday 's storms .
Trains operated by Southeastern , Southern , South West Trains , CrossCountry , and First Great Western have been affected .
Train services to Staines-upon-Thames and Windsor have been replaced by buses .
Services in the south-west have been affected by damage to railway lines in Dawlish .
Service is not expected to restart for at least six weeks .
In Devon , buses have replaced trains between Exeter and Newton Abbot .
The damage to the railway line at Dawlish has been the subject of criticism by passenger group TravelWatch SouthWest who said Network Rail -- the company charged with maintaining the British railway network -- had been `` in complete denial '' about the vulnerability of the sea wall .
The group pointed to a 2004 report they produced arguing for re-routing of railway services on a disused railway in the area .
Trains going between Manchester and Cardiff have also been affected by the floods .
A man has been admitted to hospital , having been seriously injured when hit by a car in Glasgow , Scotland .
The accident took place at approximately 0345 UTC on Sunday morning .
The 30-year-old victim was run over by a Vauxhall car in the vicinity of John Knox Street and Wishart Street in the east end of the city .
The pedestrian was transferred to the Southern General Hospital after initially being transported to Glasgow Royal Infirmary .
The condition of the passenger , who experienced a serious head injury , was described as serious albeit stable by hospital staff .
The 48-year-old driver , who alerted emergency services to the incident , was uninjured but apparently shaken .
Sergeant Jo McPherson of Police Scotland said of the area in which the accident occurred : `` Despite it being in the early hours of the morning this route can often be busy with taxis and cars as people make their way out of the city centre . ''
Appealing to potential witnesses for information , Sergeant McPherson said : `` The area is also overlooked by residential flats and it 's possible someone may have witnessed the crash from their flat . ''
A 78-year-old male cyclist died yesterday after being hit by a car in the Scottish capital Edinburgh .
The accident occurred when the car hit the cyclist on the B800 road at approximately 1000 UTC yesterday .
The driver of the car , a black Mercedes-Benz B-Class vehicle , was not injured in the incident and has reportedly been cooperating with police as they investigate .
During inquiries the road on which the accident occurred , which connects Kirkliston and South Queensferry , was closed .
In appealing to witnesses , Sergeant Ross Drummond of Police Scotland said the force has yet to track down any witnesses to the incident .
`` I am appealing for anyone who saw either the man on his bike -- he was wearing every day clothing and was not in specialised cycling clothes -- or the car around this time , '' Sergeant Drummond said .
Space scientists located on three continents have published a survey of hot flow anomalies -LRB- HFAs -RRB- observed at the bow shock of Venus , in Journal of Geophysical Research on Tuesday .
HFAs , discontinuities in the solar wind , were found to have much larger repercussions for Venus than for Earth .
While the common HFA space weather phenomenon is deflected by the Earth 's magnetosphere , Venus does not have such a reliable protection against the constant solar wind .
Venus 's ionosphere is generally in a sensitive balance with the outside pressure from the solar wind , and is regularly disrupted by the anomalies .
The survey was conducted using data collected during roughly three Venusian days -LRB- about two Earth years -RRB- by the European Space Agency 's Venus Express , expanding on an initial case study of a HFA at Venus published in 2012 .
`` Not only are they gigantic , '' said Glyn Collinson of NASA , the first author of the papers published in 2012 and 2014 , '' -LSB- b -RSB- ut as Venus does n't have a magnetic field to protect itself , the hot flow anomalies happen right on top of the planet .
Seven events were observed during the surveyed time .
The scientists found a direct relationship between the protein AP2-G 's with malaria gametocytes -LRB- male and female sexual forms -RRB- production , which is necessary for the transmission .
Only the sexual forms infect mosquitoes and sexual reproduction occurs within the mosquito digestive tract .
The P. falciparum group was kickstarted by research in Spain which found different organisms from the same strain with identical DNA had varying levels of AP2-G , with a strong correlation to their levels of sexual activity .
Researchers in England , later also drawn into the international team , analyzed the genomes of two mutated strains of P. falciparum which were both unable to form gametocytes .
They found that the gene responsible for producing the AP2-G protein was the only common non-functioning gene .
The parasites exist in a mosquito , then in a human , and require subsequent transmission for the parasite to spread .
The parasite triggers formation of the sexual gametocytes into the human 's circulatory system every two days in small quantities -- not wasting energy on the process at the dry time of year when few mosquitoes are available -- but little was known about the mechanism .
Dr. Oliver Billker commented on the potential of getting the transmission of malaria under control , unlike the existing focus on addressing the phrase causing the clinical symptoms , `` Current drugs treat patients by killing the sexless form of the parasite in their blood -- this is the detrimental stage of the malaria lifecycle that causes illness .
However , it is now widely accepted that to eliminate malaria from an entire region , it will be equally important to kill the sexual forms that transmit the disease . ''
The researchers hope to continue research toward drugs to prevent the transmission of the disease .
The science was funded by groups including UK research councils , the Spanish government , the U.S. National Institutes of Health , and the European Commission .
On Tuesday , members of the Israeli Knesset began a debate on an issue it had never before broached .
MK Moshe Feiglin of Likud started the debate about one of Jerusalem 's holiest sites , The Temple Mount .
Feiglin spoke to freedom of religion and the right of Israelis to pray on the site controlled by the Arabs while opponents addressed their fears the sensitive topic could harm ongoing peace talks .
He said , `` Any terror organization can raise its flag there , -LSB- but -RSB- there can be no trace of the Israeli flag .
Only Jews are forbidden to pray at this place . ''
During the debate , Labor MK Eitan Cabel reacted to Feiglin 's motion , `` Why stop at the Temple Mount ?
A `` Greater Israel '' promised by God is generally considered off limits in civic discourse inside Israel .
The Knesset did not vote on the issue .
Al-Aqsa Mosque ranks just behind Mecca and Medina as the holiest of Islamic sites .
Jews consider the Temple Mount to be their holiest site .
Dr. Salama said the gas field had been found by Palestinian fishermen in the Gaza Strip , who noticed bubbling in the water which they first assumed was from fish or plants moving underwater .
He added , samples from the site had been taken by navy personnel to the Islamic University , where they were verified .
In a statement to AFP he said `` preliminary tests carried out by experts from the Islamic University suggest that there is a natural gas field near the coast '' .
In an interview to the Gazan radio station Sout Al-Aqsa , Salama said the gas deposit lies only 200 to 300 meters from the central coast of the Gaza Strip , which would `` facilitate the work of any company that might invest in this field .
Deputy Hamas Prime Minister Mr. Ziad Al-Zaza calmed down the excitement regarding the issue in a comment to AFP . ''
-LSB- W -RSB- e need to conduct further studies to confirm that there is any gas '' , he said .
`` This requires probing by specialist companies because we do n't have the adequate laboratories and experts here '' .
The Gaza Strip , which has been governed by Hamas since 2007 , is now experiencing the most severe energy crisis in its history .
Following the lack of fuels , the residents of the Gaza Strip sometimes need to manage with only 12 hours of electricity a day .
Heidi Hopkins , a taxonomic researcher and PhD candidate at the Museum of Southwestern Biology of the University of New Mexico , in Albuquerque , New Mexico , United States , conducted a four-year study revising the Arenivaga genus of cockroaches , discovering 39 new species in the genus previously thought to contain 9 species .
ZooKeys journal published her findings Wednesday .
The study involved examining over 5200 specimens from universities and collections throughout the United States .
The researcher had to dissect the specimens ' genitalia to accurately distinguish the species as their external features were often not enough for identification .
Hopkins was advised by Dr Kelly Miller during the investigation .
The species are also sexually dimorphic , making morphological association of females with males a challenge .
The researcher published a key for adult males in the genus .
Hopkins remarked about potential of further studies of the genus and Corydiidae , its parent family , `` The extent of the radiation of this genus is quite surprising .
These animals have remarkable adaptations that allow them to succeed in some of the harshest places on earth .
I suspect that the thorough application of modern collection methods would reveal many more species of Arenivaga across Mexico , and many more species of Corydiidae in the deserts and dry places of the rest of the world . ''
The study was a first revisit of the genus since 1920 with only one new species discovered since then .
The study was supported by grants from American Museum of Natural History , Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University , National Museum of Natural History , and University of New Mexico .
On Wednesday , NASA announced the confirmed discovery of 715 new exoplanets orbiting just over three hundred stars ; this confirmed using data from the orbiting Kepler telescope .
Scientists made the discoveries by analyzing data from the first two years of the Kepler Telescope 's operation , from May 2009 to March 2011 .
These findings have nearly doubled the total number of known exoplanets .
It is also the largest number of exoplanets ever confirmed at once , exceeding any previous discovery by a factor of 20 .
In addition to vastly increasing the number of known exoplanets , it has now been established that solar systems with multiple planets are common , and approximately Earth-sized exoplanets are relatively common .
Nearly all the newly discovered planets are smaller than Neptune ; with several only 2.5 times the diameter of Earth , and located within their star 's habitable zone .
Significant planets found include Kepler-296f , which is twice the size of earth and may have liquid water on the surface , although it is also possible it could be more similar to Neptune .
The findings are to be published in the The Astrophysical Journal on March 10 .
It is expected many more planets will be confirmed as scientists continue to examine the Kepler mission 's data .
A judge in England yesterday jailed `` cruel , calculating , selfish and manipulative serial killer '' Joanne Dennehy for life without parole .
Dennehy murdered three men known to her and then tried to murder two random strangers .
At the Old Bailey in London , Mr Justice Spencer sentenced Dennehy , 31 , previously referred to in court as Joanna , and three accomplices .
Gary Stretch , 47 , also convicted of the attempted murders , was given a life term and can apply for parole after nineteen years .
Leslie Layton , 37 , received a fourteen-year term for helping dispose of bodies .
Robert Moore , 55 , received a three-year sentence for helping Dennehy .
Joanne Dennehy laughed , talked , and smiled during proceedings but stood silent and emotionless with her eyes closed when the sentence was announced .
The judge said she had a `` sadistic lust for blood '' .
Dennehy had admitted her crimes ; Stretch and Layton went to trial .
She killed Lukasz Slaboszewski , 31 , in Peterborough after leading him to believe they were lovers ; he texted a friend `` life is beautiful '' about the supposed relationship .
All were stabbed in March last year .
Lee 's body was found dumped in a ditch clad in a black sequinned dress .
She told a psychiatrist `` I killed to see how I would feel , to see if I was as cold as I thought I was , then it got moreish . ''
Mr Justice Spencer noted Dennehy held a `` strange fascination '' to the men in the case .
Lee 's family said in a statement yesterday `` We feel Joanne Dennehy brainwashed Kevin , causing him to make a bad decision , and he has paid for that with his life . ''
Following the Peterborough murders Dennehy made a 140-mile trip to Hereford where she stabbed dog walkers Robin Bereza and John Rogers with a knife within nine minutes of each other .
Mr Justice Spencer identified Dennehy as a psychopath with paraphilia sadomasochism , in which sexual pleasure is gained from the suffering of others .
She wrote him a letter saying she had no remorse for the murders .
The mother of two joins Myra Hindley and Rose West as the only women to be given whole-life sentences in the UK , in which convicts are told they will never be released .
The sentencing follows a recent ruling by the court of appeal upholding the legality of whole life terms .
The four defendants were jailed in Courtroom 2 of the Old Bailey , where on Wednesday Michael Adebolajo also received a whole life term for a terror attack which killed soldier Lee Rigby .
At least ten attackers with knives , dressed in black , attacked a train station in Kunming , China yesterday .
At least 28 victims were killed , with 113 more wounded by knives , Chinese state news agency Xinhua reported .
Xinhua called the attack `` an organized , premeditated violent terrorist attack '' .
One suspect was arrested , while four or five suspects were shot dead .
Yang Haifei , a local resident , told Xinhua the attackers rushed in and began attacking people while he was buying a ticket .
`` I saw a person come straight at me with a long knife and I ran away with everyone , '' he said , while people who were slower were attacked and `` fell on the ground '' .
Preparations are underway for an annual legislature meeting , at which president Xi Jinping as well as his government are to deliver their first one-year work report on Wednesday .
Xi Jinping states there should be `` all out efforts '' to apprehend the attackers , while the Ministry of Public Security 's Security Management Bureau stated law enforcement will `` crack down the crimes in accordance with the law without any tolerance . ''
In a response published Saturday by The Associated Press , the International Paralympic Committee commented on Russian adherence to the Olympic Truce in regards to the country 's actions in the Ukraine , saying `` As with situations around the world , we hope a peaceful resolution can be found in the spirit of the Olympic Truce , which has covered the Paralympic Games since 2006 .
-LSB- ... -RSB- We want the story here to be the great festival of sport that has already taken place in Sochi and will continue now that athletes are arriving for the start of the Winter Paralympics . ''
In the past few days , Russian troops entered the Ukrainian Crimea and took control of a number of strategic locations , including an airport and a regional parliament .
Yesterday , Russian forces surrounded a Crimean Ukrainian military base .
The British Paralympic team have said they are continuing to monitor the situation , but has no current plans to make changes regarding their participation at the Games .
The United States Paralympic team has said they have n't made any changes to their plans in response to the situation .
Yesterday the Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister John Baird said there are no plans to boycott the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi , Russia even as Canada takes other actions in response to Russian military intervention in Crimea , Ukraine .
On Saturday Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper also stated there were no plans to boycott the Games , set to start March 7 .
Baird is quoted in as saying , `` We do n't want the athletes to pay the price for this .
-LSB- ... -RSB- But politically ... I do n't think there 's any way we 'd want to have senior-level government leadership going there to somehow glorify Russia 's leadership . ''
Toronto Star Sports Columnist Cathal Kelly published an editorial on Saturday saying Canada needs to boycott the Sochi Paralympics .
Canada has already recalled its ambassador to Russia .
The Canadian government is considering expelling the Russian ambassador from the country .
Yesterday , Harper said the country plans to boycott meetings leading up to the upcoming Russian-chaired G8 summit .
He also said Canada was working with the United Nations to monitor the situation in the Ukraine , and is exploring the possibility of offering financial assistance to the country .
Canada has previously boycotted an Olympics in Russia .
In 1980 , the country boycotted the Summer Olympics in Moscow because of the USSR invasion of Afghanistan .
Burbank : Yes , the borders of the Ukrainian state were drawn up in 1991 and reinforced by the 1994 Budapest accords .
Blank : It is unlikely that Ukraine could prevail in such a conflict but I think it would unhinge Russian calculations , create the basis for protracted conflict , including guerrilla war for which Russia is not prepared , and thus force the West to act and begin the process of imposing costs on Russia that Putin did not foresee .
Kotsonis : No one thinks Ukraine can stand up to Russia .
It 's partly because Russia is bigger and better equipped , partly because Russia has bases in Ukraine , and partly because Russia is relatively united .
One will have to see whether Ukraine will unite when so many of its citizens identify with Russia .
Brandist : Clearly such measures would have negative effects , and the business community in Russia is clearly worried .
Moreover , it is European states that would face any potential flood of refugees and so European states will not be keen on too much pressure that could lead Russia to press Ukraine even more .
Germany effectively vetoed Georgia 's attempt to be part of NATO , and it would have even more interests in trying to stabilize the situation now .
In this situation the ` Western nations ' mentioned have limited leverage , though it clearly would have an impact .
Sanctions that would register are sanctions on Putin et al so they can not access their money , action in the WTO -LSB- World Trade Organization -RSB- to arraign Russia for violating its statutes , legislation placing sanctions on Russia equivalent to those on Iran that have crippled it , staging a run on the rouble , and if necessary blockading the Baltic and Black Seas to prevent maritime commerce .
Most importantly but this is over time , Europe must reorient its gas and oil purchases away from Russia on a long-term basis .
All these moves must be taken together and in tandem with military-political moves to uphold Ukraine 's integrity and sovereignty and thus preserve peace by deterring Russia and imposing excessive costs upon it .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- There are reports that Russia could be ejected from the G8 group of developed economies .
There is a substantial constituency in Russia that is nostalgic about its imperial status , especially after the humiliation inflicted on the state during the Yeltsin period , and these conflicts are presented in this context .
Kotsonis : No , it would probably increase his popularity in an us-v-them dynamic .
Morris : No , this is a distraction by Putin from increasing economic and political problems in Russia .
A minority of Russians support deployment and I think support from ordinary Russians will fall when they realise deployment may result in the killing of fellow Slavs .
Clearly , some people in Russia oppose this assault on Ukraine , as we have seen from the arrests and beating of demonstrators in Moscow .
There is a section of the academic `` community '' -- also a deceptive word -- that is opposed to the invasion .
I would like to repeat one point : the notion of a simple nationalized divide between East and West Ukraine is both false and counter-productive .
It is dangerous for the Western media to reinforce the notion that nationalist sentiment -LRB- pro-Russian or pro-Ukrainian -RRB- is the only political force in Ukraine .
A whole generation has grown up since Ukraine 's independence and many people , old and young and in the middle , have ideas about sovereignty and politics that are not simply `` ethnic . ''
Moreover , the Crimea and east of Ukraine are not necessarily viewed as fully a separate nation among many Russians .
Many Russians have relatives there and go there for vacations .
However , we have seen significant opposition movements in recent years , which shows that if things turn out badly then Putin may be vulnerable .
There is clearly an assessment of risks that has been carried out by the Kremlin , and so far it has paid off .
Indeed , it probably strengthens Putin 's compromised standing at home , but if things do go wrong then this could change quickly .
Kotsonis : Yes , this seems to be the case .
Europe 's gamble last year was to pull Ukraine into the Euro orbit by forcing Ukraine to choose .
Almost anyone in Russia saw this as a direct challenge .
I ca n't say for certain but I imagine a large majority think the intervention is justified .
Mind you , it is complicated because Russia has been given rights to the bases on the Crimea and this may give Russia the pretext for a larger intervention .
But it does not seem to be a clear-cut legal case for intervention and everyone understands that this is Russia smarting over the loss of an ally in Yanukovich and guarding its own back yard interests .
Brandist : I think it unlikely at present .
Russia humiliated the US when it entered Georgia to stop it becoming part of NATO , exposing the limits of US power in areas where Russia has an overwhelming superiority in conventional weapons .
Russia clearly can not contest the US on a global basis in the way that the USSR once could , but it remains a great power with a powerful regional presence , while the limits of US power have been graphically illustrated in the Middle East and Caucasus .
In my personal opinion resolute NATO action combined with economic and political action of a similarly robust nature would force Russia to back down because it knows it can not afford to go up against NATO .
Indeed this operation was undertaken because Putin et al openly and -LSB- ... -RSB- publicly declared their belief that Obama and other Western leaders are weak , irresolute , and afraid to act .
This calculation must be reversed decisively if peace is to hold .
The US has used stern language but so far has taken direct intervention off the table .
On the other hand Russia has declared publicly that it can intervene militarily and has decided that the US will not .
`` Proxy '' does not capture it because Russia is actually in Ukraine and the US wo n't be .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- In response to Russia 's build-up of its forces in Crimea , Ukraine has ordered a full military mobilisation .
To what extent can Ukrainian troops hold back and successfully fight Russian forces ?
Morris : Anything is possible , but I think Ukraine lacks the political will to enter large-scale conflict .
Brandist : Russia has overwhelming superiority in both the south and east of Ukraine , and the Ukrainian forces are not necessarily reliable in a conflict with Russia given the support for Russia among a substantial part of the Ukrainian population .
Ukraine does , however , have substantial assets elsewhere and if Russia was to try to move into the Ukrainian heartland it would be a substantial operation .
Moreover , Russia does not want a division of Ukraine , which could lead NATO to become established within the borders of the ex-USSR , so it is more likely it is seeking to change the facts on the ground so to be able to negotiate from a position of strength .
It is difficult to predict how events will unfold on the ground , however , given the informal and extreme nationalist forces who are operating .
Gerry Collins , star of Ireland 's QUIT anti-smoking ad campaign , died yesterday morning .
Collins began smoking at seventeen but had stopped by the time he was diagnosed with throat cancer in 2008 .
He described the treatment as `` horrendous '' and was featured by the QUIT campaign in 2011 after defeating the illness .
A keen sportsman , Collins played football for Dublin and his local Kilmacud Crokes team .
The national Health Service Executive credits him with convincing 60,000 people to try to stop smoking .
His family released a statement saying they are `` incredibly proud '' of him and that he `` loved hearing the many stories of people who had quit after seeing his ads or hearing his interviews . ''
Sochi , Russia -- Yesterday , Jon Lujan of Littleton , Colorado was named the United States flag bearer for the 2014 Winter Paralympics opening ceremony scheduled to take place tomorrow in Sochi , Russia .
In Sochi , Lujan is rooming with Heath Calhoun , the 2010 Winter Paralympics United States flag bearer .
Like Lujan , Calhoun is also a veteran , having served in the army .
In 2003 , while serving in Iraq , Lujan ruptured two discs in his back .
Following a back surgery in 2005 that attempted to fix the discs , he had complications that resulted in permanent nerve damage and paralysis in his lower legs .
Earlier today , skier Millie Knight was selected as the flagbearer for Great Britain .
He said the Ukrainian Paralympic team is very democratic , and reached this decision together .
Their view is if they boycotted the Games , their message of peace would be forgotten in a few hours .
While stating the team intends to compete , the Ukrainian team reserved the right to leave the Games immediately should peace not happen , and the Russian military does further intervention in the Ukraine .
Sushkevich , who is also a member of the Ukrainian Parliament , denied accusations their comments and decisions have been political in regards to the two hour delay for the team 's welcome to the Paralympic village , and actions taken during the welcome ceremony .
Rather , he claimed these actions were motivated by a message of peace and human rights .
According to Sushkevich , never before during the Paralympic Games has the host country invaded a participating country .
Suskevich talked about a discussion he had yesterday with Vladimir Putin , the leader of Russia , where Sushkevich talked to Putin as a member of the Paralympic family .
The response he received from Putin was that he was heard and Putin would think about what he said .
The President said that he views the achievements of the Paralympics above that of the Olympics , that the Paralympics play a vital role in the lives of the athletes .
He said the 31 members of the Ukrainian team want to compete .
He later said the team has representatives from ten regions of the country , including the western Russian parts .
Further comments were made by Ukrainian Paralympic Committee President that in past few years , all of Ukraine 's Paralympians who were veterans of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan .
Ukrainian biathlon competitor Grygorii Vovchynskyii also spoke during the press conference .
He said Ukrainian Paralympians are part of a big family , and supporters ask them every day how they feel .
According to Vovchynskyii , Ukrainian Paralympians want peace .
At a press conference immediately following the Ukrainian one , IPC representative Craig Spence said IPC learned of Ukraine 's decision to compete at the same time as the media .
He said he would prefer Ukraine competes but would understand if they decided to leave .
Spence also said all 45 teams and all competing athletes were reminded there could be no alterations to their kits , and no protests .
Everyone is bound by these rules , and the IPC is monitoring social media for athlete compliance .
Saturday , March 8 , 2014 In the first sledge hockey game of the 2014 Winter Paralympics held earlier today at Shayba Arena at Sochi 's Coastal Village Olympic Park , Norway defeated the Czech Republic 2 -- 1 in a shootout win .
Norway 's Audun Bakke scored the team 's only goal in regulation time during the second period .
The Czech Republic 's Michal Geier scored the equalizer in the third period .
Norway scored the only overtime shootout goal .
These Games are only the second ones that the Czech sledge hockey team have participated in , making their debut at the 2010 Winter Paralympics .
Norway is next scheduled to play Canada tomorrow , and then Sweden on March 11 to complete their games in group play .
The Czech Republic is scheduled to play Sweden tomorrow and conclude group play against Canada on March 11 .
Earlier today , in the second game of sledge hockey play at the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi , Russia , top-seeded Canada routed Sweden by a score of 10 -- 1 .
Anthony Gale , Adam Dickson , and Dominic Larocque led their team in scoring with two goals a piece .
Canada dominated possession in the first period , and ended with four goals on eleven shots .
With the puck rarely in the Canadian third , Sweden managed only one shot on goal in the first .
Billy Bridges scored first for Canada , with Ben Delaney scoring Canada 's second , Adam Gale scoring Canada 's third and Dominic Larocque scoring Canada 's fourth goal in the first period .
Sweden came out with more energy in the second period , managing to get the puck more into the Canadian third of the rink but finished the period with only two shots on goal .
Canada on the other hand managed to get eleven shots on goal in the second period , scoring three times .
Kenth Jonsson came into goal to start the third period for Sweden , with Ulf Nilsson leaving .
The third period involved a lot of Canadian puck possession in the Swedish third .
When Sweden was able to make a run down the ice with the puck , the crowds cheered loudly .
Despite the puck possession issues , Sweden scored first in the third with a goal by Per Kasperi off an assist from Niklas Ingvarsson and Niklas Rakos with around 9:38 left in the third period .
Five minutes left , Canada went on to score a quick succession of goals , the first coming with 4:48 left in the third and during a power play .
Adam Dickson scored with an assist from Brad Bowden and Kevin Rempel .
Twenty seconds later , Dominic Larocque scored with an assist from Rempel .
With 3:30 left in the game , Canada went up 10 -- 1 with a goal scored by Anthony Gale .
The Canadian fans were on their feet and waving their flags .
Neither team was able to score in the remaining time .
Canada had a much deeper bench than Sweden , and were able to execute multiple complete line changes .
In contest , Sweden had only three available players on their bench , with line changes consisting of changing only one player .
Canada finished fourth at the 2010 Winter Paralympics , a contest played on home soil , with eight members of their current seventeen member roster returning to compete in the 2014 Games .
In sledge hockey , players use two hockey sticks , one in each hand .
One end of the hockey stick is very hard and used to propel the player down the ice .
Players compete while sitting in a sledge , which has two blades at the back that can be no longer than a third of the length of the sledge .
The height of the sledge off the ice is high enough that the puck may pass under it .
At 2:30 left in the first , Valerio Corvino of Italy got 2 minutes in the penalty box for roughing .
Immediately following the goal , Italian Werner Winkler got a 2 minute penalty for roughing .
The pace of the game slowed down in the final minutes , and there were fewer hits .
The occasional United States fan chanted `` USA , USA , USA . ''
The first period ended 1 -- 0 in favour of the United States .
When the Italians had the puck and looked likely to score , the multitude of Russian flags were waved and the fans cheered in support of the team .
The United States allowed Italy to get possession after two players crashed into each other and had to untangle their sledges .
At 10:20 left , Italy managed to get a shot on goal , which the USA goalie stopped .
A United States fan was screaming at the team at one point shouting , `` Get it out . ''
Italy had several good chances but they were not able to capitalize on them .
The second period started with lots of Italian cheering from the stands , while the Americans possessed the puck on the Italian third of the ice .
The penalties were over and both teams were at full strength by 14:10 left in the second .
Early in the period , Italy got a two minute penalty for too many players on the ice .
The United States also addressed possession problems they had in the first period and kept the puck in front of the Italian goal .
Team USA still had problems with executing passes though .
Whenever the Italians got possession of the puck and looked like they might have a remote chance of scoring , the Russian fans started cheering loudly .
With 3:48 left in the second , Brody Roybal scored with an assist from Declan Farmer .
With 1:18 left in the second , Guiseppe Condello got a 2 minute penalty for teeing when he rammed the front of his sledge into a USA player 's sledge .
The period ended 2 -- 0 in favour of the the United States .
During the intermission , a Paralympic presenter went into the audience to talk to Team USA fans in the stands for the screens found on display in the arena .
chant , a number of people inside the arena booed .
The third period started with Team USA possession .
Early in the period , Taylor Chase had a 2 minute penalty for teeing , and both teams were shorthanded with 14:38 left in the third .
With 3:26 left in the third , Team USA player Paul Schaus earned a 2 minute penalty for roughing .
The Team USA goalie made a fantastic above-the-head glove save with 3:05 left in the third .
With 1:26 left in the game , Italian Florian Planker scored off an assist from Gianluca Cavaliere .
The stadium erupted into loud chanting , and lots of waving of Russian flags .
Adam Page was injured with 1:08 left in the game , and left the ice to a round of applause from the fans .
The United States 's Paul Schaus scored off an assist from Nikko Landeros with just under 5 seconds left in the game , bringing the final score to 5 -- 1 .
Despite the teeing penalty , the number of collisions appeared down from earlier in the game .
Both teams were at full strength with 12:33 left in the third period .
With 11:56 left in the third , Joshua Sweeney got the puck , moved it down the ice and then slid it past the Italian goalkeeper to score an unassisted goal .
Midway through the third period , and most of the puck possession took place on the Italian third of the ice .
With 4:42 left in the third , with assists from Joshua Pauls and Nikko Landeros , Brody Roybal scored on the Italians to little applause from people in the arena .
Following the goal , Team USA took a timeout and made a goalkeeper change , with Steve Cash out and Jen Lee in .
The United States comes into Sochi as previous Paralympic gold medalists , having won it at all at the 2010 Winter Paralympics in Vancouver , Canada .
Steve Cash started for Team USA .
Russia swept the podium in the men 's 15km sitting event held earlier in the day , with Roman Petuschkov winning gold , Irek Zaripov silver and Aleksandr Davidovich bronze .
Ukraine 's Maksym Yarovyi finished just out of medal standing fourth place .
United States skiers in the race included Andrew Soule who finished fifth , Sean Halstead who finished ninth , Aaron Pike who finished twelfth , Daniel Cnossen who finished thirteenth , Augusto Jose Perez who finished seventeenth and Bryan Price who finished nineteenth .
Wheelchair curling continued today at the Ice Cube Curling Center at the 2014 Winter Paralympics on difficult playing conditions as a result of the warm temperature outside .
In the morning session , the South Korea lost to Russia in the eighth end by a score of 5 -- 7 , the United States lost to Canada 2 -- 7 in seven ends , Norway edged out Finland 6 -- 8 in extra ends , and China defeated Sweden 8 -- 4 in seven ends .
Unlike able-bodied curling , players release the stone from a stationary position and there is no sweeping .
Another curler often sits behind the stone thrower to hold their chair in place while they execute their throw .
Canadian Jim Armstrong has injured knees .
Canadian Ina Forrest lost her leg in a farming accident .
Finland and Norway were evenly matched , going point for point in the first pair of ends , trading 2 points each in the next pair of ends , then Norway scored 2 points and 1 point in the next ends with Finland answering back .
Tied after eight ends , they went to extra ends which Norway won with 2 points .
While Sweden won three of the seven ends they played against China , they were unable to beat the Chinese team who scored 2 points in two ends and 3 points in another end .
In the fourth end , the 3 points came after a precision takeout by the Chinese skip Wang Haitao that cleared two Swedish stones off the sheet .
With the crowd behind them the entire match , Russia came from behind after the first end and third end to tie things up in the fifth end and take the lead .
They allowed the South Koreans to score two points in the seventh end to force an eighth end .
Russian skip Andrei Smirnov cleared a South Korean stone sitting in front of three Russian stones off the sheet that gave the Russians a two point lead .
The United States has not medaled at the past two Paraympic Games , with their best finish a fourth at the 2010 Games .
James Joseph , the second , competed at the 2006 Winter Paralympics and 2010 Winter Paralympics .
The skip and Madison , Wisconsin native , Patrick McDonald , competed at the 2010 Games .
Penny Greely , the lead , competed in sitting volleyball at the 2004 Summer Paralympics where she won a bronze medal .
David Palmer , the third , is competing at his first games after having a fourth place finish at the 2013 World Championships in Russia and a fifth place finish at the 2012 World Championships in South Korea .
Alternate and Cape Cod native Meghan Lino is also at her first Paralympic Games after taking up the sport in 2009 .
Sweden 's team has three team members who competed at the 2010 Games in Vancouver , Canada : Jalle Jungnell , Glenn Ikonen , and Patrik Kallin .
60 year old Jungnell has the team 's most Paralympic experience , having competed at the 1988 , 1992 , and 1996 Summer Paralympics in wheelchair basketball , as well as competing at the 2006 and 2010 Winter Paralympics in wheelchair curling .
Finnish born Ikonen had been suspended for six months following the Vancouver Games following a positive doping test .
He claimed metroprolol was a drug he had been using for 4 or 5 years , and was unhappy that his doctor prescribed the blood pressure reducing drug because he would not have intentionally taken a banned substance .
Alternate Oksana Slesarenko from Yekaterinburg and skip Andrei Smirnov also from Yekaterinburg have the most experience on the team , both having taken up the sport in 2003 , and competing at the 2004 , 2005 , 2007 , 2008 , 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 World Championships .
Team Canada includes all five members of their 2013 World Championship winning team , including 63-year-old skip Jim Armstrong , 51-year-old Dennis John Thiessen , 52-year-old Ina Forrest , 47-year-old Sonja Gaudet , and 37-year-old Mark Ideson .
Gaudet is the only wheelchair curling Paralympian with two gold medals , having won them in 2006 and 2010 .
Teammates Armstrong and Thiessen were part of the 2010 gold medal winning team .
While Armstrong was inducted into the Canadian Curling Hall of Fame in 1990 for his accomplishments in able bodied curling , Gaudet was the first wheelchair-only curler to be inducted when she was part of the 2013 class .
Both originally played other sports before taking up curling .
Kang played table tennis and Kim played wheelchair basketball .
On Saturday , Russia beat China 5 -- 4 , South Korea lost to Norway 0 -- 10 , Canada beat Great Britain 6 -- 3 , and Slovakia defeated the United States 6 -- 4 in the morning session .
Sweden beat Finland 7 -- 6 , Canada beat Russia 5 -- 4 , the United States lost to South Korea 5 -- 9 , and Norway lost to China 3 -- 7 .
In the morning session yesterday , the United States defeated Norway 8 -- 5 , Sweden lost to Great Britain by a score of 4 -- 6 , China lost to Slovakia 3 -- 8 , and Finland lost to Russia 4 -- 7 .
In the afternoon session yesterday , Canada defeated Sweden 7 -- 4 , Finland lost to Slovakia 6 -- 9 , and Great Britain beat South Korea by a score of 8 -- 4 .
Bob Crow , the general secretary of the United Kingdom 's National Union of Rail , Maritime and Transport Workers -- better known as the RMT -- died today aged 52 from a suspected heart attack .
Crow is widely known for leading numerous strikes by workers that led to disruption of public transport services in the United Kingdom .
The current Mayor of London , Boris Johnson , said in a statement : `` I 'm shocked .
Bob fought tirelessly for his beliefs and for his members . ''
The current Labour Party leader , Ed Miliband said in a statement : `` Bob Crow was a major figure in the labour movement and was loved and deeply respected by his members .
I did n't always agree with him politically but I always respected his tireless commitment to fighting for the men and women in his union .
He did what he was elected to do , was not afraid of controversy and was always out supporting his members across the country .
Former Mayor of London Ken Livingstone praised Crow , in a remark to Sky News : `` He fought really hard for his members .
Hassan is a Yemeni national who was captured in 2002 and has been in the military prison for almost 12 years without charge .
The techniques used to force feed prisoners on hunger strikes involve methods deemed illegal by a report of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
The prisoners ' allegations include their captors using water torture techniques and inserting large nose tubes to deliver food .
Strapping down and feeding laxatives to detainees , while force-feeding , is also alleged .
The Department of Defense is responsible for the welfare and security of inmates in the prison according to White House officials .
Spokesperson Caitlin Hayden for the White House National Security Council told al-Jazeera : `` The Department of Defense has responsibility for the health , welfare and humane treatment of detainees at Guantánamo Bay , and I would refer you to them for further questions about the specifics of their policies and procedures '' .
Benn 's father and both grandfathers were MPs -LRB- Members of Parliament -RRB- in the Liberal party ; his father defected to Labour and became a Cabinet Minister .
Benn grew up in London and was a pupil at Westminster School before studying politics , philosophy and economics at New College , Oxford .
Tony Benn became an MP in November of 1950 and was a member of the cabinets of Harold Wilson and James Callaghan .
In 1981 , Benn ran for deputy leadership of the Labour Party but lost .
Benn 's son Hilary also joined Labour and is an MP for Leeds Central .
Benn 's children released a statement following his passing : `` We would like to express our heartfelt thanks to all the NHS -LSB- National Health Service -RSB- staff and carers who have looked after him with such kindness in hospital and at home .
Labour leader Ed Miliband said Benn was an `` iconic figure of our age '' , `` a champion of the powerless , a great parliamentarian and a conviction politician '' .
David Cameron said on Twitter : `` Tony Benn was a magnificent writer , speaker and campaigner .
Nico Rosberg won the opening race of this year 's Formula 1 season in Australia yesterday .
TV commentators spoke of `` fascination throughout the field '' as big names retired and new names proved themselves .
The race was unusual from start to finish , having been shortened by one lap after the first start was aborted by amber lights instead of just green .
The end is more controversial ; home driver Daniel Ricciardo scored his first-ever Australian Grand Prix podium finish in second place but was later disqualified for an alleged breach of fuel regulations .
Ricciardo had been the first Australian driver to stand on the podium in his home country since Formula 1 brought the event into the championship format used today .
His team , Red Bull , have vowed to appeal .
If the appeal fails all the drivers below him move up one position , meaning first-time entrant Magnussen will have come in second place and Kvyat will be ninth .
That would see Sergio Perez score a point for Force India by moving into tenth .
Perez 's race was hampered early by a puncture picked up in the opening lap .
Ricciardo was reported to the stewards by technical delegate Jo Bauer who claimed his car `` exceeded consistently the maximum allowed fuel flow of 100kg/h '' .
100kg is also the maximum fuel allowed on board cars , a new limit set for this season .
The fuel flow rule is also new this year ; F1 cars averaged about 170kg/h last year .
Red Bull have hit back with a statement saying many teams have found the FIA 's fuel flow meter to be faulty .
They say they are `` confident the fuel supplied to the engine is in full compliance with the regulations . ''
Today Andrew Westacott , chief executive of the Australian Grand Prix , said the appeal outcome may not be known for weeks .
Rosberg , speaking after what is his first Australian victory , said it is `` Such a pleasure to have such a fast car . ''
It is also the hundredth victory by an F1 car powered by a Mercedes engine .
`` Whatever the outcome I 'm really proud of what I did today '' , Ricciardo said as he awaited the stewards ' disqualification decision .
Former champion Lewis Hamilton qualified on pole but problems were evident by the second lap when he received a team radio message telling him `` we need to retire ... save the engine , save the engine ! ''
Another followed rapidly , however , telling him to `` just stay out , stay out , just keep on rolling '' .
Hamilton left the race on the fourth lap .
Vettel and Hamilton were not the only stars retiring early .
Veteran racer Felipe Massa was rammed from behind by Kobiashi 's Caterham , sending both cars out and prompting deployment of yellow flags for several laps while the debris was recovered .
The crash was triggered by Kobiashi clipping Kimi Raikkonen , damaging the front of Kobiashi 's car .
Raikkonen stayed in the race and managed to finish eighth .
Coulthard and fellow commentators believe Kobiashi , who took responsibility for the accident , may receive points on his racer 's licence in a new system to deal with transgressions introduced this year .
Kobiashi called the crash `` My mistake -LSB- ... I -RSB- should have braked earlier , and I apologise to Felipe '' .
Massa said Kobiashi `` can not do a start like that , every time '' he does so will lead to an accident .
More drama followed shortly after when Valteri Bottas clipped a wall on lap 10 , breaking the rim of his back-right wheel .
The rim was left on the track , followed shortly thereafter by the tyre off the wheel .
The safety car was deployed for several laps until the debris was recovered .
Despite the setback Bottas climbed back up the standings and finished in sixth place .
Many drivers , including cars at the front of the pack , took advantage of the safety car period to do pit stops .
Some are now considering using less fuel than the maximum allowance in a move the FIA never expected technologically possible when drafting the rules several years ago .
Not every débutante was so lucky ; Caterham driver Marcus Eriksson dropped out of his first race after being radioed `` Stop the car , stop the car , engine oil pressure '' .
Established racers Pastor Maldonado and Romain Grosjean , both Lotus drivers , also stopped with technical trouble .
All three cars pulled up at the side of the track on different laps , each triggering yellow flags .
Hamilton was upbeat about his retirement , saying `` It 's tough for everyone but that 's the way it is '' and adding `` We 're not the only ones -LSB- to have difficulties -RSB- '' .
Vettel was more pessimistic , claiming this is `` going to be a long season '' .
Asked about the cause of his engine troubles , Hamilton said `` One of the cylinders , I think , was not firing '' .
A ScotRail train travelling from Glasgow to the towns of Oban and Mallaig in Scotland accidentally diverted onto the wrong track tonight .
Some passengers initially thought the train had derailed when it swerved and braked hard at Ardlui .
The train hit them at 19:50 at sufficient speed to potentially damage them , although the train was able to reverse after they had been inspected .
The service was stranded at the station for some time .
Although much of the train snaked away from the platform , the rearmost door was still aligned with the platform , allowing passengers including our correspondent to get off and see the situation for themselves .
Several passengers photographed and videoed the surreal scene on mobile phones .
No other trains were struck in the incident , but the train to Glasgow in the opposite direction was also left waiting at the platform while the situation was resolved .
The diverted train ultimately reversed off the points and away from the station , then realigned itself with the platform .
The incident adds to troubles on the West Highland Line this weekend .
On Friday a train leaving Oban at midday departed without reservation slips marking seats booked by passengers , and that train was delayed for 40 minutes at Crianlarich , where the train joins with the Mallaig service to form a single train heading to Glasgow .
More serious incidents occurred in 2012 , when a train heading from Oban to Glasgow struck a landslip caused by heavy rains but did not derail , and in 2010 , when a train derailed , caught fire , and was left dangling over a nearby road .
Trains travelling both to and from Glasgow struck trees on the line on the same day in 2011 , one near Crianlarich and one near Ardlui .
White-Gluz leaves The Agonist , of Canada and another extreme metal band .
White-Gluz remarks she is `` very honoured and happy to announce a new chapter in my life and musical career -LSB- ... -RSB- I have joined forces with one of my all-time favourite and globally respected bands '' .
Founded in 1995 , Arch Enemy replaced founding vocalist Johan Liiva with Gossow in 2000 .
Fans are set to hear White-Gluz 's vocals in June with the release of War Eternal .
Gossow said yesterday `` Right now I am listening through rough mixes of the new studio album and I am blown away ! ''
Founding member , leader , and head songwriter Michael Amott said `` We welcome Alissa with open arms -- and we hope you will have open ears . ''
White-Gluz said yesterday `` It is not often that you get a phone call from your favorite band asking you to join ! ''
Fred Phelps , the founder of the vehemently anti-gay Westboro Baptist Church in Topeka , Kansas , died yesterday aged 84 .
The church he founded in 1955 became infamous for leading pickets at the funerals of US soldiers , as well as the funeral of Matthew Shepard , a young gay man killed in a homophobic attack in 1998 .
At funeral pickets and other protests , Phelps and other members of his church held brightly coloured signs with messages including ` God Hates Fags ' , ` Thank God for 9/11 ' and ` Thank God for Dead Soldiers ' .
The picketing of military funerals stems from the postion that God is punishing the United States for its acceptance of homosexuality .
The Church has sued a great number of local authorities in the United States who attempted to block their demonstrations and the settlements from their First Amendment cases helped fund their activities .
In 2011 , the Church won a case at the US Supreme Court which upheld their right to demonstrate at funerals .
Other countries were not so keen : Fred Phelps and his daughter Shirley Phelps-Roper were banned from entering the United Kingdom in order to take part in a planned protest against The Laramie Project , a play about the death of Matthew Shephard .
The UK Border Agency stated the Phelpses were not welcome because of their actions `` inciting hatred against a number of communities '' .
The Church has seen a number of widely-reported defections including Megan Phelps-Roper , who used to run Westboro 's social media operation before publicly leaving the congregation and publishing an apology on the Internet .
Before Phelps 's death , he was excommunicated from the Church -- whose members are primarily drawn from his family .
Nathan Phelps , Fred Phelps 's son , posted on Facebook last week announcing his father 's hospitalisation and illness : `` I 've learned that my father , Fred Phelps , Sr. , pastor of the ` God Hates Fags ' Westboro Baptist Church , was ex-communicated from the ` church ' back in August of 2013 .
Terribly ironic that his devotion to his god ends this way .
Nathan Phelps continued : `` I feel sad for all the hurt he 's caused so many .
I feel sad for those who will lose the grandfather and father they loved .
And I 'm bitterly angry that my family is blocking the family members who left from seeing him , and saying their good-byes . ''
The Eleventh International Human Rights Documentary Film Festival opened Friday in the Red Hall of the Kyiv Cinema House , in Kyiv , Ukraine .
Competition programs are divided into DOCU/Right , DOCU/Life , and DOCU/Short .
Each program has its own jury that consists of famous human rights activists , film producers , directors , critics , writers etc. .
The opening film was called Euromaidan : Rough Cut .
It was a combination of shots of different film directors that have been filming the protests in Ukraine during these past four months .
The festival was first held in 2003 , called at that time Docudays on Human Rights .
In 2006 the festival was accepted as part of the international Human Rights Film Network at the International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam .
Penrose , from the West Coast town of Oban , had been recalled to prison for alleged further offending after being paroled from a sentence for sexual assault against a teenager .
Police Scotland confirmed they were called to the prison , Scotland 's largest , shortly after 2:00 am on Thursday when Penrose was found dead in the cell .
Neighbouring England has seen a spate recently , including four last year .
Those four deaths were all charged as murder and represented the highest England and Wales total since 1998 .
Clark has been remanded pending a full committal hearing next week .
Clark is variously reported to be either 21 or 22 .
Penrose died on the top floor of the jail 's E Hall .
E Hall includes accommodation for vulnerable prisoners .
Penrose , who attended Oban High School , is survived by his parents , both 60 .
`` I hate football and I hate the police '' , his profile reads , adding he enjoyed a drink at the weekend .
Without explaining the injury he asked `` does -LSB- anybody want -RSB- to say anything about my eyes in this picture or do -LSB- you not -RSB- give a shit -LSB- what -RSB- happens to me '' ?
Several friends posted condolences to his page after his death .
One claimed he had been strangled .
The famous four-storey Victorian prison is routinely overcrowded , with prisoners sharing cells meant for individual use .
In 2011 governor Derek McGill complained `` If we could eliminate overcrowding , we could do more with the prisoners . ''
He was speaking after an inspector branded the facility unsafe for prisoners and staff alike due to chronic overcrowding .
Scottish Executive spending cuts around the same time reduced the Scottish Prison Service 's building funds significantly .
Plans are nonetheless afoot to replace Barlinnie with a new prison , to be called HMP Glasgow .
The Prison Service is tendering for consultants to identify potential sites .
Although the Scottish Government aims to reduce prisoner populations the new prison is to be more than twice the size of Barlinnie .
The nation 's sex offenders were , until recently , usually all held at Peterhead .
The internationally-acclaimed sex offender treatment center was permanently closed late last year and the inmates moved elsewhere .
Peterhead prison has been replaced with the # 140 million `` super prison '' HMP Grampian , built next door to the Peterhead site .
Men , women , and young offenders are all held at the prison for the first time at a Scottish jail and the first inmates arrived this month .
Aberdeen prison has also closed and been replaced with the new jail .
Dave Brockie of rubber-costumed metal act GWAR was found dead in his Richmond , Virginia home late on Sunday .
Better known by stage name Oderus Urungus , Brockie was 50 .
Founder , singer , leader , and occasional bassist of GWAR , Brockie 's career stretches back to 1984 .
He and fellow Virginia Commonwealth University art students formed what they dubbed `` Earth 's only openly extra-terrestrial rock band '' , growing famous for satirical and obscene lyrical themes , and live shows featuring the defilement of effigies and plenty of fake blood .
Fellow founding member Don Drakulich , who still makes props and costumes for the rockers , said he was `` very sad '' and `` shocked '' .
He said Brockie 's roommate found the corpse .
GWAR members changed frequently and the band recovered from the sudden death of guitarist Cory `` Flattus Maximus '' Smoot during a 2011 tour , but the New York Daily News notes `` it 's hard to envision their saga going further '' after Brockie 's death .
The band ran with the backstory of crashing to `` the most insignificant planet in the universe '' 43 million years ago before creating humans by having sex with apes .
Becoming encased with ice , the legend ran that upon thawing out in 1984 the members decided to form a band .
Manager Jack Flanagan announced the death via GWAR 's website , adding a post-mortem will be conducted .
`` My main focus right now is to look after my band mates and his family '' he said .
Flanagan said another GWAR member found the body .
Brockie said in 2009 `` I am one of the blessed people that gets to do what I love to do for a living . ''
GWAR received a Grammy nomination in 1993 , with Phallus in Wonderland up for Best Longform Music Video .
Blythe also took to Facebook .
`` Right now , if I were to truly honor Dave in the way HE would do it if it were ME that had died , I would make a completely tasteless joke about his death .
Ex-GWAR guitarist Steve Douglas said on Facebook `` I have had a few bad days in my life but this one truly ranks right up there .
`` I wish it was a joke '' said another ex-member , Chris Bopst .
Former bassist Mike Bishop paid tribute in an interview with Style Weekly .
Prime Minister Tony Abbott supported the proposed amendment , saying : `` Of course this Government is determined to try to ensure that Australia remains a free and fair and tolerant society , where bigotry and racism has no place .
But we also want this country to be a nation where freedom of speech is enjoyed . ''
Indigenous Liberal MP Ken Wyatt expressed concern over the legislation , and warned he could vote against his own party .
`` For me , it is about not disabling a mechanism that makes people think carefully about the vilification of anyone or any group because they know there is a deterrent , '' said Wyatt .
The proposed draft will undergo community consultation for a month , with Senator Brandis welcoming alterations , `` I am acutely aware of the importance that in protecting freedom of speech , we do n't send the wrong messages .
The legislation will be introduced to the Parliament of Australia in the budget session when it resumes on May 13 .
And I 'm proud of the fact that the folks in Zionsville took the ball and ran with it .
I was honored to work with then state representative Jim Buck , from Kokomo , who also represented Zionsville .
It was n't until afterwards that Zionsville became part of my area .
The Town Hall chambers in Zionsville is the former Methodist church where Beth and I got married in .
And I was asked to speak right in the same place where I exchanged my wedding vows with my wife .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Tew : Thank you , senator .
I am Chad Tew , and we are here at The Edge radio studios with my journalism students and recording from the campus of the University of Southern Indiana , in Evansville .
Our first question will come from Jordan .
Mike Delph : Well that was ultimately adjudicated by the military .
Colonel Mejia ended up retiring in good standing with the military .
So I think everybody has moved forward and moved on .
The purpose of that press conference was to show Ray Mejia to the world , and how a guy who came from Mexico , not knowing the language , not being a citizen , used the path of the military to rise up through the ranks , get an education , learn the English language , and then ultimately become a successful executive with Eli Lilly .
To me that was a story that needed to be told .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Bayes : Tim Durham , who is now serving a 50-year sentence for running a Ponzi scheme in Indiana , was a major donator to Republicans , including your campaign .
Former Governor Daniels for instance received almost $ 200,000 dollars .
You were the first to give money back donated by Durham in 2011 after he was charged , which was $ 10,000 dollars .
However you kept money donated by BP after the Deepwater Horizon spill in 2010 .
What kind of money do you think should be given back , and what kinds do you think are alright to keep ?
Governor Daniels was hosting a Republican Governors Association fundraising event at Obsidian headquarters , and that was my first introduction to Tim Durham .
And then I have a dear friend of mine who went to high school with him down in Seymour in Jackson County .
I did not know Tim well .
I met him a couple times , but my friend Tim Motsinger -- who I 'd known through politics and Marion County used to be a deputy with Marion County Sheriff 's Department for Jack Cottey -- encouraged me to reach out to him , and I did on a couple occasions , and he wrote me two checks for $ 5000 dollars .
About that time , I had made contact with Congressman Burton , who was going to become the first Republican chairman , to chair a Congressional committee in over 60 -LSB- ? -RSB-
And we got to talking and eventually that led to a job offer for me to come and join him on his personal and professional staff out in Washington D.C. working on Capitol Hill .
I also did some work with the House International Relations Committee , which at the time was chaired by Congressman Ben Gillman from New York .
When the whole fair finance deal was coming out , and I started learning about that , the bankruptcy trustee actually sent out a list , or made a list of people that Durham had made contributions to , asking for voluntary returns of that money .
I think that all men have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God .
I also believe only one man walked this Earth without sin and his name was not Mike Delph .
When I found out about the news story , I reached out on my own to the bankruptcy trustee , and said , `` Hey , Tim gave me $ 10,000 dollars , I 'd like to return it , what do I need to do ? ''
And so I 'm very proud of BP and I 'm very proud for the way that they handled that , and I thought this political scapegoatism of them was pretty shameful .
This is a company that provides a lot of jobs , a lot of economic development , a lot of good things to the community .
We 'd play cards and have a cheeseball and you know salami and crackers .
We 'd bet a dollar a game on the games .
That was the time when guys like Scott Skiles were bringing Plymouth -LRB- High School -RRB- to the state championship tournament , and Steve Alford and New Castle -LSB- High School -RSB- , and Mike and Chris Heineman over at Connersville -LSB- High School -RSB- .
And then I got to learn about the story of the `` Milan Miracle '' , of the state championship run that led to the story of Hoosiers -LSB- a film -RSB- .
These are stories were high school basketball teams would captivate and grab the attention of the entire state .
I remember when the Marion Giants with Jay Edwards and Lyndon Jones dominated for a couple years .
Let 's go around the state together , let 's hold a press conference and tell the world what we are doing , and let 's take a vote at every public meeting .
We 'll give the public a chance that they did n't have at the time when we made this decision .
I think at the time the IHSAA and Commissioner Cox , in particular , thought that the public would be more allow the lines of multi-class basketball .
We probably had 50 to 100 people turn out at every one of our meetings .
One of the real joys of that whole process for me was meeting Bobby Plump and going to Milan and meeting the -LSB- 19 -RSB- 54 basketball team .
Because up until that point , the turnout was mixed in terms of whether it was single-class or multi-class .
Everyone there wants to go back to single class basketball .
I toured the Milan high school , and the athletic director tells me to this day he still gets calls from people all over the world wanting to know about Milan and Hoosiers .
He actually had a guy call him once and say how do I get to the high school , I 'm flying in to Cincinnati , and he gave him directions from the Cincinnati airport to the Milan high school so he could come see the trophies and learn more about the history because he had just seen the movie Hoosiers .
To me this is something like , just like the Indianapolis Motor Speedway puts Indianapolis on the map , we 're known as the greatest racing spectacle in world , with the Indianapolis 500 .
We are also known internationally for our wonderful single class basketball tournament , which lifts up and extolls the virtues of the underdog and the little guy .
When we went to multi-class basketball we lost some of that cultural identity that Indiana was known for .
Thank you very much Senator for being with us tonight and speaking to fifteen journalism students and myself ...
To receive the latest news , please visit wikinews.org , presenting up-to-date , relevant , newsworthy and entertaining content without bias .
Wikinews is a free service and it is funded by your generous donations .
Click on the donate link on our homepage to learn how you can contribute .
This recording has been released under the Creative Commons 2.5 License .
I have a 17-year-old daughter , who just turned 17 .
She told dad that she wanted a boyfriend for her birthday , and so I went out and got a little stuffed animal of the good guy from Frozen -LSB- a film -RSB- , which I said you can take to bed with you every night and cuddle with .
I have a 14-year old named Anna , a 10-year old named Emma , and my 7-year-old , who will probably -- well her name is Lilly , that she believes she will be the next rock star of rock music .
And she and I play my guitar and sing every night .
I work as general counsel for a second-generation family-owned business based out of Bloomington , Indiana , named CarDon & Associates .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Behnke : We understand that you and your wife home educate your children .
Originally my 19-year old was part of the Carmel school system and attended Carmel Elementary and had a real challenging year , her first grade year .
We were actually told by her first grade teacher that she would have a hard time graduating from high school and that college was not in the cards , which obviously was a lot for mom and dad to take with our first grader .
We were going to take matters into our own hands and start homeschooling our daughter .
And this honorary award is awarded by the Governor .
I am Chad Tew and we are here in The Edge radio studios with my journalism students and recording from the campus of the University of Southern Indiana .
MD : That was something that I was recommended by former Congressman Baron Hill , who represented the southeastern part of the state .
And I had gotten to know Congressman Hill when I was an executive with Comcast Corporation .
We actually brought the C-SPAN school bus throughout his district , especially to his hometown of Seymour , Indiana .
And we had gotten to know each other , and he found out that I had served as an international election observer with the International Republican Institute in Nicaragua in 1996 and then in Mongolia in 2000 .
And then Governor Kernan , before he left office as our governor , was very gracious to award me the Sagamore of the Wabash .
Primarily putting stickers on fire hats in preparation for his parade season .
But primarily in the national security foreign policy area , primarily focused on anti-narcotics and the drug war .
There was a new tribes and missionary case that I worked on where there were three men who were abducted by the FARC , and there was no proof of life , and they just basically disappeared .
They eventually declared the missionaries as being killed by the FARC .
But as you can imagine , it was one of those things where the family was in limbo and they just did not know and nobody was trying to find out for them .
Probably one of the most thankful points in my time for him was when I helped write , or helped ghost write , the resolution honoring the life of Mother Theresa , which was adopted by the Congress .
You all probably do n't remember , but Mother Theresa died right around the time that Princess Diana died and all of the news coverage at the time was dedicated towards Princess Diana .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Jordan Mornout : You ended up losing your first campaign when you sought the nomination for Indiana 's Secretary of State in 2002 .
It 's interesting because you guys really ... I was kind of surprised with the capturing of the whole flyer deal on the floor , which misled the convention to think that I had willingly dropped out of the race , and my strategy was to win it on the second ballot .
The people that were supporting Todd Rokita were supporting him because of their relationship with Sue Anne Gilroy , and they would support me if Todd was not in the race .
The people that were supporting Richard Mourdock were supporting him because he was older and had more experience than I had .
After being selected to finish former State Senator J. Murray Clark 's final term in 2005 , Mike Delph has served two full terms for District 29 in the Indiana State Senate .
His opponent is likely to be Democrat JD Ford , who is running as an openly gay candidate .
And so I had literally campaigned in all 92 counties for two years of my life , driving around the state of Indiana in my American-made Honda Civic , which became a political issue for part of the race .
And really it was that campaign that created the foundation for my ability to become a senator .
But there 's no question that that was a hard-fought campaign , and the way that it ended was less than favorable .
Literally , the next day I had to get on an airplane to fly to Camp Shelby , Mississippi to do my 2 weeks of army training in the middle of nowhere .
I was running my own home-based business called MA Advisory Group , which was based upon my grandfather 's name of his company , the MA Delph Company , which I mentioned before .
That led to Richard Mourdock reaching out to me .
While that whole thing was going on , my wife and I took a three-week home school trip out to the East Coast , to visit former Revolutionary War historical sites to learn more about the founding of the country .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Law : Senator Delph , your opposition to same-sex marriage and your public expression of love for your brother Stephen has us wondering about how you reconcile what seems to some as contradictory stances .
My faith tradition teaches me that homosexuality is one in a number of sins that 's listed out in the Bible , and so that 's why I have an opposition to anything that institutionalizes , or legitimizes , a given sin .
He 's had a very tough life , and we 've been through a lot together .
I support his right to be a human being , as well as I do all human beings and to live his life .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Tew : Senator , your brother said on the air that you had set him up on a date .
Senator Delph has also been considered in the past for US Congress but he declined to run , and he has already been mentioned in the Indiana media as a possible candidate for any potential opening in the US Senate in 2016 .
I have friends that I went to college with that I have suggested could be friends with my brothers -- several of my brothers quite candidly -- and in this case , I had a friend from college , who at the time had recently told me that he was gay .
And my brother , I think , mistakenly made the connection that by me introducing him to a friend of mine who is gay that somehow there was more to it than that .
My brother Stephen is not used to talking to the media and knows that he misspoke when he made that characterization .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Bobby Shipman : Senator Delph , this is Bobby speaking now .
HJR-3 -- the proposed constitutional amendment that would have banned same-sex marriage and civil unions ?
Then you have to have an election and you have to have the new legislative body take up the exact same language and pass the House and Senate .
And so from a procedural standpoint if it did n't pass in the same form this time the clock gets reset and the process starts over .
When I surveyed my constituents , and I do an annual legislative survey , over 60 percent of my survey responses suggested that people wanted the opportunity to vote on this issue via referendum this year November of 2014 .
Either way , because of the actions of the leadership of the House and the Senate , my constituents were denied that opportunity to vote and resolve this issue once and for all in November 2014 .
Because of the path that we chose , there is going to be pressure to bring this back next year and possibly years beyond that .
So the state of Indiana is going to be forced to deal with this issue year in and year out .
I think if the polling data is accurate , as you expressed it , then the folks that were the opponents of HJR-3 -- specifically the folks that were in leadership within Freedom Indiana -- were working against their own self-interest .
And so these are all things that our state and society have to reconcile .
But to me the ultimate issue was bringing this whole thing to closure and by denying people the right to vote this November we did not bring this to closure .
Well if public opinion has truly changed then it was in their interest to pass this through the legislature and send it to the people themselves for an up or down vote were the referendum would be defeated and the issue would forever be gone and dealt with .
MD : Well some could say that .
If that brings the issue to final closure .
But having sat in the legislature now for eight years , I think there 's going to be pressure to bring this back this next session -- some sort of version .
They may put the civil union ban back in it , which then puts it on another two years .
And so for me , I do n't think the information is going to be any clearer .
And if public opinion has changed , then those that support same-sex marriage worked against their own self-interest by denying the people the right to vote on this in November of 2014 .
So there is no question that the federal courts are getting involved .
There is equal protection ground litigation that is being filed throughout the country .
And specifically in Indiana , I think , there has been four law suits filed challenging the Indiana Statute , which has been on the books since 1986 .
Traditionally , the widely held view is that the US Constitution trumps the State Constitution and that federal decisions in court trump state constitutional law .
And so those are all things that have to be reconciled with the public opinion , and with the will of the people , and what they want , and how they view their government , and how they want society to react and deal with these types of issues .
Let me just make one more comment ... To me though we can not as a legislative body at the state level of government , live in fear of litigation .
We have an Article 6 oath of office that we take to the US Constitution that binds all elected officials to the same rule of law -- except the President of the United States , who takes a separate oath of office .
During the legislative session this year , Senator Delph made what is known in Indiana as the `` tweet heard around the world '' .
The tweet announced the defeat of a proposed amendment to the Indiana State Constitution in a form that would have banned civil unions .
Senate leader David Long punished Delph because of this tweet on the grounds that it concerned confidential caucus information .
What exactly took place in that Republican caucus and between Senator Delph and Senator Long is currently unknown to the public .
He could not understand how a super majority House and a super majority Senate could not get this issue to the voters .
I worked with Senator -LSB- Dennis -RSB- Kruse , who had told me that Senator -LSB- David -RSB- Long had wanted to control that process and have Senator Mike Young introduce the amendment on the floor that would restore the second sentence so that we could adopt the entire amendment and send it to the voters .
I had started my own whip count and I was stuck on fifteen solid Republican votes to agree on the floor to reinsert the second sentence .
And so we had caucus , I ca n't tell you what was discussed or said or done in caucus , but because I had filed my amendment -- because at the time I was n't positive that an amendment was going to be filed .
Within minutes of Dennis Kruse calling HJR-3 for second reading -- and that 's when I put out the tweet saying there was n't support for me to call my amendment and that the second sentence was dead for the session of the General Assembly .
But what I did n't anticipate at the time was that everybody under the sun would retweet that tweet and I would start to trend nationally .
At that point , this evolved into a whole other level of newsworthiness .
Senator Long came back on the floor and asked me about it and I explained what I did and why .
And for me , given how divisive this was and how draining it was in terms of energy and what not , it did n't make any sense to me to pass something for political purposes that was n't going to have any legal consequence .
And I was trying to bring to light my reasoning and thinking as to why I felt like this was a set up job from the beginning and that there was no intention to get this to the people .
And how Senator Long had controlled the process .
And how every step of the process the decisions that he made gave evidence to what I was saying that the people were never going to see this amendment at the ballot box in November of 2014 .
I also felt like it was newsworthy that one of the most conservative members of the Indiana State Senate was going to vote against the marriage amendment because it had no legal consequence .
I wanted to explain to the public and to my constituents why a guy that is a strong supporter of traditional Judeo-Christian values , was not going to support the marriage amendment .
Now I do n't accuse Senator Long of lying ; that is a little strong .
There are some -- because what has been said to the media , particularly by Senator Long -- that have had the wrong perception that I may have violated a confidence of the caucus .
The tweet that I put out was based upon my own information , from my own whip count that I kept on this project .
Senator -LRB- Scott -RRB- Schneider knew about my whip count .
Senator Dennis Kruse knew about my whip count .
Senator Mike Young knew about my whip count .
And so this idea that I violated a caucus confidence is unfortunate , it 's wrong , it 's untrue , it 's misleading , and , hopefully , this will help correct that record .
MD : That is a great question because -LSB- laughs -RSB- -- There is another issue over in the House of Representatives about caucus confidence being violated .
I do n't know if you are following that with the whole nursing moratorium issue --
But it was interesting because the following Thursday I was called in to Senator Long and there were a couple of other senators , and they brought me in there to tell me what my consequence from this whole event was going to be .
And they listed out four different things that were going to happen , and they then told me they were going to go to the caucus and privately tell them what was going to happen .
And they say `` Senator Delph , we understand this , this , this and this are going to happen to you because of violating caucus protocol .
And I think the public has the right to know what their elected officials are doing on behalf of them and in some cases against them .
And in this case , I did not violate a caucus confidence , and I was trying to advocate for my constituents , who wanted the right to vote on this issue as reflected in the surveys that they returned to my office .
I was trying to give them their opportunity , which they said they wanted , to vote on this one way or the other .
Does Senate leader David Long serve the Republicans in the state senate or do they serve him ?
When you are in the arena , you are going to have issues , and I have enjoyed serving with Senator Long .
But ultimately we the people elect elected officials to serve in the legislative branch of government .
And as Thomas Jefferson said , `` The consent of the governed are who give and what gives elected leadership and legislatures the legitimacy to make decisions on behalf of the people . ''
And so Senator Long has been elected by the Republican caucus to a position of great public trust -- to manage the institutional integrity of the senate .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Tew : Thank you , Senator .
Welcome back , Senator .
I was raised by my mother .
My parents were divorced for most of my upbringing .
While my father was on leave from his business -- or actually helping his dad , my grandfather , with one of their plants out east -- I was born in South Weymouth , Massachusetts , just outside of Boston .
There are a lot of YouTube videos and interviews that I 've done and I 've tried to be consistent in the story that I 've been telling making sure that the truth gets communicated to the public .
It was a tweet that I actually put out , again , directly from the senate floor within minutes of HJR-3 being called down for a second reading , and I did that , again , because there were a number of media requests to explain what I was going to do or not do with the amendment I had filed to restore the second sentence .
I would encourage your listeners and your students if they 've not done so to go listen to the press conference on YouTube .
In my intro -LRB- Wikipedia : Voice Intro Project -RRB- that I read for Wikinews for the project that the professor and I worked on together , I reference myself as a fiscal and social conservative .
Just two years prior to that , President Barack Obama won the same Senate district 56 percent to 44 percent over John McCain .
So I think my history has shown an ability to have people who are n't necessarily conservative Republican voters vote for me .
I try to listen to everybody , anybody in my district who has an issue or concern or wants to talk to me or tell me what they think about anything , always gets my ear .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Bradie Gray : Recently , political commentator Brian Howey wrote about your senate district .
Is it fair to say that your district is not socially conservative , that your stand on HJR-3 might not been aligned with your constituents , and that the Democrats see your seat as an opportunity .
MD : Well you will to talk to the Democrat Party about what they see as an opportunity .
I survey my constituents every year before we go in session .
And I knew that the marriage amendment was going to be something that was going to be debated and considered .
I sent that survey to all registered voters in Senate District 29 and over 60 percent of the respondents said they wanted a chance to vote in November 2014 .
My position primarily was driven by that piece of information and my desire to try to advocate on behalf of my constituents to bring this whole issue to resolution .
Very little else was covered because the media was so fixated on it .
And so I was hoping we could deal with this whole issue in 2014 but others felt differently that were in the leadership .
And so we are going to be dealing with this issue on into the future .
The proof is going to be in the pudding when we run for reelection in November 2014 whether or not this is the driving issue to drive turnout and ultimately render judgement over the totality of my service in the senate .
I 've been known widely as somebody who is a leader on Veterans and military issues .
Last year , we expanded contracting opportunities for veterans returning from Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom .
I have been named Legislator of the Year by the Disabled American Veterans .
I 've been awarded the Mr. Clean Award by Common Cause for my efforts to promote lobbying reform , and ethics reform , and redistricting reform .
I 've led an effort to change the law in the area immigration reform .
My 19-year-old daughter Abby , who is a freshman at IUPUI , is going to serve as my campaign manager , and I 'm going to teach her how to do this .
We have the leader of the College Republicans at Anderson University , as well as IUPUI and other leaders from Butler University that will all be involved in my grass roots effort .
Before Thanksgiving , there was some talk that somebody might try to challenge me in a primary .
And our grassroots effort , we had home school moms and volunteers make over 7,000 phone calls to base , Republican voters .
And we are going to let the voters make their decisions .
I have a business man , a Christian pastor , who has offered to write a check for $ 25,000 to support me .
Another person is going to write a check for $ 2500 .
There are some churches that will be sued and possibly forced to ordain a relationship and a union that their God rejects .
And so there are some businesses that will probably have some concerns but there will be other businesses that will support my position .
I think most businesses though , are n't really motivated by this issue in particular .
They are just out trying to run a business to make payroll , to grow their business , and I 've got a strong business-friendly record as delineated by the Indiana Chamber of Commerce and the Indiana Manufacturers Association .
Where we 've given the local government units the ability to phase out the business personal property tax if they so choose to do so , and a gradual further reduction of the corporate income tax .
Last year , I also carried into law a bill that Governor Pence signed into law before a board of directors meeting of the Indiana Economic Development Corporation calling for and requiring more transparency and the economic incentives that we give out to companies that say that they are going to create `` X '' amount of jobs in exchange for those economic incentives .
So bottom line , I think my record in the senate has been very pro-business and pro-job growth and pro-economic development and so I think businesses will look more at that than they will look at HJR-3 .
After the candidates have been officially nominated by the voters of each party .
We just have not , ever , believed as a society that that translates to same-sex marriage .
And so , any man has the right to marry a woman who agrees to marry him , and any woman has the right to marry any man who agrees to marry her , and that is equal , you know , across all boundaries .
But what I 'm told , the biographical backgrounds and positions are pretty black and white , night and day , and so I think the voters , for what I 've been told without studying the issues on him , will get a sharp contrast .
I spent four years in leadership as an assistant majority floor leader for communications revamping the whole communications process through two communications directors .
I 've carried a number of bills into law .
I 've served for a publicly traded company as an executive in their government affairs department , and so I have a lot of business experience , applied experience in the Indiana General Assembly .
MD : Well , I 've not actively sought higher office .
That was the first year that our nation started talking about operational deficits -- the difference between revenue and expense on an annual basis -- in terms of trillions of dollars .
It is mind boggling to me that since 2008 the United States government has added a trillion dollars in national debt each and every year .
People wo n't think it 's a good enough risk to invest in and at that point Judgement Day happens .
And because of that , that 's led to speculation .
When the speculation took place regarding Senator Lugar and also Congressman Burton , we did have brief discussions with my family , with my daughters , around our kitchen table .
Some of my daughters have been character actors , or youth interpreters I should say , at Conner Prairie , a live museum here in central Indiana , others have served as members of the Indianapolis Children 's Choir .
They 're all very involved in the home school community and their friends are here .
Until I get to a point where my family balance can be taken into consideration , I do n't anticipate seeking higher office .
But I 'm always humble and grateful that people consider my record and my views worthy of consideration for such purpose .
Your passage of the local government initiative that would allow governments to merge was very successful in your district , but not successful elsewhere around Indiana .
MD : Well the reform that came from House Bill 1362 , which at the time was the most dramatic reform in Title 36 , in probably 25 years or more .
And so in the case of Eagle and Union Townships deciding to dissolve themselves and then enter into a pact with the town of Zionsville and create the new town of Zionsville , it took vision .
It took selfless service because you had two township trustees that had to agree to dissolve their reason for being .
I think part of the problem that we 've had in other parts of the state , including Evansville and Fort Wayne , is that the process and the law has not been adequately marketed and explained to the public and to elected officials .
MD : I kind of backed my way into politics .
And my mom and dad went to high school with Congressman Burton at Shortridge High School .
I served one summer stint as a representative from the School of Public and Environmental Affairs .
Barack Obama announced his aim to seek `` the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons '' in Prague in 2009 .
He has been pressing his foreign counterparts , both in Asia and Europe , demanding they either get rid of their excess nuclear materials via the U.S. , or tighten security on stockpiles at home .
Belgium and Italy have also agreed to hand over excess nuclear material .
The deal is part of an ongoing U.S. goal to reduce fissile material worldwide .
The U.S. hopes to convince more nations to use reprocessing and enrichment facilities in an effort to minimize proliferation risks .
The law passed in 2012 would take effect on April 1 .
According to Planned Parenthood , if the law takes effect , it will prevent some women from having an abortion .
The Arizona state Attorney General 's Office states it is only regulating one form of abortion .
Abortions are usually medical abortions , meaning medication is taken to induce abortion .
The new law would only allow use of abortion medication just as approved by the Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- or specified by the product label .
Previous cut off time was set at nine weeks .
It would also require the medication be administered at the abortion facility .
Planned Parenthood says requiring administration at the facility is a problem particularly for those outside of cities , as the medication is administered over several days .
The waterway is known to be dangerous when the weather is rough , and combined with a lack of life-jackets and a general inability of passengers to swim , incidents like this often lead to high body counts .
Days before , a campaign had been launched by the DRC to enforce wearing lifejackets aboard all vessels in the nation 's waterways .
Since Saturday , the death toll has continued to climb , it was initially reported that twenty had died .
On Monday , UNHCR received information from authorities that 41 people had been rescued and 98 bodies recovered .
This number climbed again by Tuesday -- with reports stating 107 had died , including 57 children .
The survivors were taken to the Bundibugyo district , in the north-west of Uganda , where UNHCR and the Ugandan government are providing help , including psycho-social support .
Relatives of the deceased are identifying family members at the district hospital .
UNHCR and the Ugandan government are assisting in the transport of the bodies back to the DRC , and have established an information and response point for relatives of the survivors .
Julian Paluku , governor of the North Kivu district has said the recovery of bodies will continue .
The spacecraft , which launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2117 UTC on Tuesday -LRB- 3:17 AM , Wednesday local time -RRB- , was originally scheduled to dock with the space station at 0304 UTC on Wednesday .
It was not in the proper orientation to execute one of the engine burns required as part of the expedited rendezvous procedure used since last year , however , and docking with the ISS was delayed until yesterday .
The mission reverted to the flight plan used on Soyuz flights to the ISS previously : a longer , two-day , 34-orbit rendezvous .
The precise cause of the malfunction has not yet been publicly announced , but NASA said Wednesday , all systems aboard the Soyuz appeared to be functioning normally despite the setback which prevented a docking approximately six hours after launch .
Also according to NASA , engineers understand the issue and have developed methods to prevent a recurrence on a future flight and the crew was never in any danger .
TMA-12M is a return to space for both Skvortsov and Swanson , who are making the trip for the second and third times , respectively .
Artemyev is visiting space for the first time .
They launched aboard Soyuz TMA-11M in November of last year and were the sole inhabitants of the station since the departure of Soyuz TMA-10M on March 11 .
Skvortsov , Artemyev and Swanson are to become the crew of Expedition 40 when TMA-11M is scheduled to depart in May with Wakata , Mastracchio and Tyurin aboard , at which time Swanson is to assume command of the station .
The trio are slated to remain aboard the orbital outpost for approximately six months , until TMA-12M undocks in mid-September and returns to Earth .
Margaret River Senior High School , in Western Australia , has become the latest target for the Westboro Baptist Church -LRB- WBC -RRB- .
The Kansas-based extremist group announced their plans to picket the school 's upcoming play via its Twitter account on Wednesday .
On Wednesday , WBC -- well-known for their anti-gay stance -- tweeted `` WBC to preach God H8s Fags @ the Margaret River Senior High School -- the land of the damned down under '' .
Another appeared on Thursday reading : `` Westboro pickets Margaret River HS on 4/2/2014 -LSB- April 2 , 2014 -RSB- '' .
The Awards Ceremony was held in the Red Hall of the Kyiv Cinema House .
There were 36 documentary films competing for prizes in three festival programs : DOCU/Short , DOCU/Right , DOCU/Life .
The picture of him was chosen by the organizers as the `` image that would deliver the spirit of our -LSB- Docudays UA -RSB- festival to the best of its possible might '' .
The piece of movie where he is taking tangerines from a woman that morning has become the official trailer of the festival .
The episode is featured in the opening film of the festival Euromaidan : Rough Cut .
The organizers decided to find out who the symbol of the festival was , and if he was alive .
Nikita had the opportunity to say on the microphone , `` Slava Ukraini '' -LRB- Glory to Ukraine -RRB- , and have the whole hall hollering back at him , `` Heroiam Slava '' -LRB- Glory to the Heroes -RRB- .
Joanna , directed by Aneta Kopacz , Poland , 2013 , received special mention .
The main prize went to Liza , Go Home !
, directed by Oksana Buraja , Lithuania , Estonia , 2012 .
The film was awarded for `` filmmaker 's poetic sensibility and respect for other humans ' secrets '' .
No Fire Zone : The Killing Fields of Sri Lanka , directed by Callum Macrae , UK , 2013 , received special mention .
The film was awarded for `` the powerful use of video advocacy in global awareness-raising and opinion-shaping regarding the mass murders of civilians belonging to a Tamil minority in Sri Lanka '' .
The main prize went to Mother 's Dream , directed by Valerie Gudenus , Switzerland , 2013 .
The jury awarded the film for `` a highly sensitive , empathic , and artistic presentation of a controversial and socially resonant human rights problem , affecting the fates of women and children globally '' .
Natalka Zubar of Ukraine announced the winners .
Crepuscule , directed by Valentyn Vasyanovych , Ukraine , 2014 , received special mention .
The film was awarded for `` a visually and emotionally superior depiction of human resilience , sensibility , and interdependence '' .
The main prize went to The Last Limousine , directed by Daria Khlestkina , Russia , 2014 , awarded for `` a dignified , compassionate portrayal of state-factory workers lost in transition , but not in humanity '' .
The jury mentioned the film was perfectly casted .
His rival , incumbent Prime Minister and the official candidate of ruling Smer-SD -LRB- Direction -- Social Democracy -RRB- party Robert Fico received 40.61 percent of the vote .
51-year-old self-made businessman Andrej Kiska is the first Slovak president without previous experience in politics , and the first who has never belonged to the Communist Party , since Slovakia became an independent country in 1993 .
Kiska is to be inaugurated as the fourth President on June 15 , and be president for the next five years .
In a press conference late Saturday , Kiska thanked his voters and supporters , before vowing : `` As the president I will stand up for the people , for every decent person of our country .
And I promise I will try to humanize our politics , to re-establish trust and decency , because people are frustrated of disputes .
As the president I will do everything to make our politics more human . ''
Millionaire Kiska made his fortune in the financial industry .
In 2006 he co-founded charitable foundation Good Angel , working with cancer victims .
Most of his money has been given to charity , and he has sold off his businesses .
Kiska said he chose to stand after witnessing impediments to his business and charitable work .
Fico 's party controls most of Slovakia 's power institutions .
A bitter election campaign saw Fico wage a smear campaign against Kiska , who has filed criminal allegations against Fico .
Incumbent President Ivan Gasparovic 's term ends June 15 , with Kiska taking the reigns at a swearing-in the same day .
Despite remaining out of recession , Slovakia suffers high unemployment which coupled with recent corruption allegations has shaken electorate faith in Fico and mainstream politics generally .
Kiska promised to tackle corruption .
His run-off election bid against Fico was widely supported by mainstream parties and defeated candidates from the previous round of elections .
The number of Sumatran rhinos worldwide is now around 100 , according to Roth , who is the vice president of Conservation and Science and the director of Conservation and Research of Endangered Wildlife -LRB- CREW -RRB- at Cincinnati Zoo & Botanical Garden in Ohio .
She told Wikinews her research facility will continue to work with its partners abroad and focus on genetic diversity .
This is going to be a tough one to save .
It 's been a roller coaster experience and it 's been a challenge , '' said Roth .
Since the late 1990s , when the Cincinnati Zoo received the last three surviving captive rhinos in the United States , she has studied their mating and pregnancy .
This led to the ability to detect pregnancy within sixteen days of conception by ultrasound .
After five failed pregnancies , Roth tried hormone treatments of progesterone with success .
In 2001 , CREW and the Cincinnati Zoo celebrated the first rhino birth in captivity in 112 years , a male named Andalas .
The previous Sumatran rhino birth in captivity occurred in 1889 in a zoo in Calcutta , India .
One is that the females do lose fertility over time if they do n't get pregnant .
So we thought even though were not doing a good genetic match , at least getting her pregnant would preserve her fertility .
Margaret River Senior High School was able to perform the play based on the 1998 beating and death of gay student Matthew Shepard to a sold-out audience undisrupted on last Tuesday night , April 1 .
The closest WBC came to picketing the school was a tweeted screenshot of a published photograph of the performance which featured a performing student carrying a sign which read `` God hates fags '' -- the anti-gay catchphrase of the Kansas based extremist group .
The school 's principle , Andrew Host , who was sceptical of the WBC 's threats to picket the school , confirmed to Wikinews the photograph was indeed a student and added `` The WBC did not attend the school at anytime during the play production . ''
On Thursday , the Church renewed its threats to picket the school , saying again via it 's twitter account `` Is tomorrow when Westboro Baptist will picket Margaret River Senior High School ?
For a second time , WBC failed to appear .
The previous Wednesday , March 26 , WBC announced its plans to picket the performance via Twitter , saying `` WBC to preach God H8s Fags @ the Margaret River Senior High School -- the land of the damned down under . ''
This was followed on Thursday March 27 by another tweet stating the protest would take place on April 2 .
Morayfield , Australia -- Sunshine Coast , Australia based roller derby team Crash Test Hunniez defeated Devotchkas 275 to 98 yesterday in their round two Queensland Roller Derby Leagues Open Season contest at the Morayfield Leisure Centre .
Calls for the ouster of British government minister Maria Miller have been increasing following a claim by the Daily Telegraph newspaper that Miller 's special adviser used the threat of press regulation to try and prevent publication of a story about Miller 's expenses .
A poll published today by a number of newspapers shows a majority of the public unhappy with Miller 's behaviour and saying she should be removed .
The issue stems initially from a report in the Daily Telegraph regarding Miller 's expenses claims to help pay a mortgage on a house in south London that Miller shares with her parents .
The newspaper claimed that she had claimed # 90,000 to pay the mortgage on the house .
The commissioner determined she should repay # 45,000 of this expense , but the Committee determined she ought to only repay # 5,800 .
Following the decision of the Committee , the Daily Telegraph reported Miller 's special adviser Joanna Hindley had said in a telephone call with the newspaper , `` I should just flag up as well , while you 're on it that when she doorstepped him , she got Maria 's father , who 's just had a -LSB- removed -RSB- and come out of -LSB- removed -RSB- .
And Maria -LSB- has -RSB- obviously been having quite a lot of editors ' meetings around Leveson at the moment .
The Telegraph alleges that this was intended as a form of intimidation : that Hindley dropped in mention of press regulation and the Leveson Report as a way to attempt to get the newspaper to drop the story .
A leader column in the Telegraph stated Hindley 's remarks were `` an indictment of the influence that press regulation by statute could have over free speech '' .
Therese Coffey , a Conservative MP -LRB- Member of Parliament -RRB- , has defended Hindley 's statements to the Telegraph , as specifically referring to the `` doorstepping '' of Maria Miller 's elderly parents , specifically her father who had been returning from hospital .
Coffey said of the audio published by the Telegraph : `` I heard an adviser to the culture secretary suggesting that it 's inappropriate to be doorstepping elderly parents of somebody who has just come out of hospital . ''
Heather Brooke , a campaigner who has been involved in the release and publication of MPs ' expenses and the scandal that followed , said the alleged doorstepping was `` a public interest piece of reporting '' , noting that the journalist from the Telegraph had to visit the property to work out who was living there .
Brooke said it was `` disingenuous to use this argument of privacy '' .
Oliver has denied the story .
`` It is utterly false to suggest that I threatened Tony Gallagher over Leveson in any way .
Miller has the backing of Prime Minister David Cameron : on Friday , Cameron told reporters to `` leave it there '' on questions of Miller 's expenses .
Iain Duncan Smith , the work and pensions secretary , suggested Miller could be targeted by a `` witch-hunt '' due to her role in press regulation following the Leveson inquiry , as well as her job in fronting the government 's gay marriage bill .
Duncan Smith told the BBC 's Andrew Marr Show : `` I am enormously fond of her .
She has done a very good job in a very difficult set of circumstances with the Leveson inquiry that has stirred up a lot of media antipathy to her .
And also the gay marriage stuff -- there are a lot of Conservatives out there who , perhaps , were not necessarily in support of it all and so feel rather bitter about that .
Labour politicians have responded to the affair with strong criticism of Miller , but no call yet to resign .
Angela Eagle , the shadow leader of the House of Commons , said : `` The latest revelations and the release of a recording raise further serious questions for Maria Miller and David Cameron .
Writer and television presenter Peaches Geldof , 25 , was found dead today in her home near Wrotham in Kent , England .
Kent Police said they are treating her death as `` unexplained and sudden '' .
Starting as a teenager , Geldof wrote for magazines and newspapers including Elle , the The Daily Telegraph and The Guardian , as well as presenting OMG !
Bob Geldof said `` We are beyond pain .
Thomas Cohen also paid tribute : `` My beloved wife Peaches was adored by myself and her two sons Astala and Phaedra and I shall bring them up with their mother in their hearts everyday .
The death of Scottish artist Alan Davie was announced on Sunday .
Davie , 93 , was known for his colourful abstract paintings .
Davie 's career also saw turns as a jeweler , a jazz musician , a lecturer , and a poet .
His father was a teacher who dabbled in art and his mother 's family was musically inclined .
Upon seeing Coleman Hawkins performing in a music shop in Edinburgh , Davie borrowed # 600 from his father to buy himself a saxophone .
After serving in the Second World War , at which time he wrote much poetry later transcribed by his father , Davie toured with Scottish jazz bands .
Davie 's work was admired by the likes of Jackson Pollock , Mark Rothko and David Hockney .
Davie himself collected non-Western art and liked tattoos , graffiti , and ` outsider art ' .
His final interview before death , with The Telegraph , gave an insight into how he viewed art : `` It 's an urge , an intensity , a kind of sexual need -LSB- ... -RSB- something I do from an inner compulsion , that has to come out . ''
He initially avoided painting as a career at all , then spent several years earning money by other means whilst his paintings failed to sell .
His exhibitions in the late 1950s , however , were highly successful and launched his career .
Despite a strong presence owing to his lengthy red beard and off-beat humour , he was shy ; his international fame waned .
London alone is host to three exhibitions this month including at the Tate .
Sunday saw Formula One racer Lewis Hamilton win the Bahrain Grand Prix after an `` incredible '' race he spent battling with teammate Nico Rosberg .
Other retirements included Marcus Ericsson and Kevin Magnussen , both rookies , who separately pulled up at the trackside .
Fellow newcomer Daniil Kvyat of Russia , who claimed the title of F1 's youngest-ever points scorer at the season opener , was placed just outside the points despite setting one of the fastest laps of the early part of the race .
Kvyat tweeted on Monday .
The podium was rounded out by Sergio Pérez in third , claiming Force India 's second-ever podium finish off the back of a failure to even start in Malaysia with a gearbox malfunction .
Nico Hulkenberg took fifth .
Both he and ninth-place Fernando Alonso celebrated upon completing the race , arms in the air .
Williams racers Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas scored seventh and eight place respectively .
Kimi Räikkönen claimed the final scoring position of tenth despite a minor collision with Magnussen at the race start .
Williams , who this year are using new bright white livery on their cars , where able to keep the coloured stripes of sponsor Martini .
Constraints from the host nation meant the word Martini itself , however , was changed to ` racing ' on the cars .
Williams test driver Susie Wolff of Scotland started a competition during the race weekend to win one of her Martini-coloured caps for submitting pictures of designs using the Martini colours .
A further near miss was suffered by Bottas when he ran off-track after becoming caught in battling between Räikkönen and Ricciardo .
His team radioed to promise a complaint would be made to race director Charlie Whiting .
Rosberg told his Twitter followers `` Great fight with @LewisHamilton but I 'm back in two weeks to take the win '' .
Hamilton tweeted `` What a race !
Amazing to get my first win in Bahrain '' and also paid tribute to his Mercedes team .
Anti-government protestors turned out in their thousands at the start of the race weekend .
The peaceful rally at the capital , Manama , was marred by small groups throwing molotov cocktails at police .
The protestors were opposed to the international attraction giving patronage to Bahrain .
Events at the circuit were given heavy security .
Rosberg started from pole position after Hamilton made a mistake in qualifying , going off-track and settling for second .
After the race Hamilton said it was `` an incredible day , a really tough day '' and he wanted some relaxation time .
Red Bull 's Daniel Ricciardo had to start from thirteenth despite qualifying third after an incident in Malaysia last race saw him given a ten-place grid penalty .
His car left the pits with a wheel loose , and stewards imposed the penalty after deeming it unacceptably dangerous .
Ricciardo managed to finish fourth to score his first points of the season after a disqualification in the opening race in his native Australia .
Reigning champion Sebastian Vettel continued to struggle with technical problems , including his drag reduction system and gearbox .
The closure of the night race was marked with a fireworks display .
Having newly switched to Lotus , he failed to complete the opening two races this year and damaged his car with an accidental wheelie practicing for this one .
Exiting the pit lane on the 41st lap Maldonado struck the side of Sauber racer Esteban Gutiérrez with sufficient force to send the Mexican 's car onto its back before rolling back upright .
Gutiérrez received medical attention on-site and in hospital as a precaution , but was uninjured .
Gutiérrez told his team via radio before leaving the car .
Maldonado received a stop-and-go penalty and finished outside the points .
Maldonado seemed to imply the other driver played a roll in the collision .
`` We will need to have a look again at what happened , '' he said , `` as Esteban seemed to be off his line coming into turn one -- maybe he missed his braking point , I do n't know -- and by then I was in the corner with nowhere to go '' .
Others said his punishment was unfair compared to Ricciardo 's ten-place grid position drop after his team 's mistake in Malaysia .
Gutiérrez thanked supportive fans via social media after the race in English and Mexican , and returned to the circuit yesterday as teams took to testing .
Maldonado was not alone in causing accidents .
Jules Bianchi received a drive-through penalty after colliding with Adrian Sutil , leaving both cars sporting punctures .
Sutil later retired from the race .
The swimmer addressed the Australian public in a video .
Here she thanked everyone that has supported her and reflected back on her Olympic career , `` It 's sad , I definitely feel like I 'm losing a part of myself , but I 'm really excited about what 's about to come . ''
After several shoulder operations in the lead up to the 2012 London Olympics , Rice fell short of her own expectations .
Long-time swimming coach Michael Bohl confirmed Rice 's doubts after the London Olympics in a telephone interview with The Associated Press today .
While Rice has left her career plans unanswered , she hopes to use her popularity with the Australian public as a platform to something else .
News broke early this morning on Facebook that Wikipedian Adrianne Wadewitz died while rock climbing recently .
Wadewitz was well known in the Wikimedia community for her activism drawing attention to the lack of female contributors on Wikipedia .
Wadewitz was one of the most visible women in the media on the under-representation of women amongst contributors to Wikipedia , talking to media organizations like the BBC , the Huffington Post and non-English publications like Greek-language magazine LIFO .
She was involved in organizing several edit-a-thons aimed at encouraging greater female participation and improving content about women , including Wikipedia Takes America : Los Angeles , FemTech Edit-a-thon , Wikipedia Loves Eagle Rock , Wikipedia Loves WeHo , and Feminists Engage Wikipedia .
Wadewitz 's own work to address systemic bias as an article contributor included improving English Wikipedia articles relating to women , including :
She had taught two classes on collaborative work on the project , and was involved with FemTechNet Wikistorming , an academic effort to encourage more women involved in academia to contribute to Wikipedia .
In the past month , she had written several blog entries on HASTAC , an online collaborative platform dedicated to changing the way people learn , about how to write about academics on Wikipedia .
Fellow activist Sarah Stierch said in a public post on Facebook , `` My heart hurts .
Adrianne was a leading voice - and her legacy still is - in the work we have been doing to get more women and more diverse peoples contributing to Wikipedia .
Stierch went on to say , `` A sarcastic , feminist , smart , brilliant , to the point delivery type of academic genius who held an honest love life for all to see and a life in LA that was becoming one she owned . ''
In 2011 , she earned her PhD from Indiana University .
A notice at the top of the page invites condolences , which have been arriving in their dozens .
`` This is a crushing loss , for the Wikipedia community and the world .
Another noted `` Adrianne embodied brilliance , determination , and enthusiasm in everything she did . ''
Cynthia Ashley-Nelson died the night before last while attending the Wikimedia Conference in Berlin , Germany .
An announcement regarding her death was made on the main Wikimedia mailing list this morning by Bence Dakamos , a conference attendee and the previous chair of the Affiliations Committee .
In part , the e-mail announcement said , `` We are sad beyond words and so is everyone who came to Berlin to participate in the Wikimedia Conference .
This morning all the conference attendees gathered together to grieve and talk about the loss of Cindy .
We decided that all of us at the Wikimedia Conference could choose to continue the conversations about the future of the movement Cindy cared so much about , as well as spending our time here to remember and celebrate her .
Fellow Affiliations Committee member Gregory Varnum said , `` The Lord giveth , and The Lord taketh away .
While the passage of time may allow us to forgive whatever greater presence you may believe in for taking her away , the passage of time will not result in us forgetting the amazing person she was , her passion for our movement , or the brilliance she brought to her volunteer work . ''
Wikimedia Foundation board member María Sefidari said in her part on her personal blog , `` I got to know Cindy a bit beyond that , for she wanted to test ideas and potential directions in which to take the movement .
We would send each other long emails about movement roles and how to move forward with the movement .
And as it usually happens , conversations turned from the more formal to the informal , eventually including little snippets of our every day lives , the good things that happened to us and the not so good .
I think our last interaction was about getting together at some moment during the conference to just hang out and talk .
She served as a moderator on the Wikimedia Foundation 's gendergap mailing list , a list dedicated to addressing the under representation of women as contributors .
She became an Open-source Ticket Request System agent , handling requests from Wikimedia users who had problems they needed assistance with issues like copyright .
She had previously been a member of Wikimedia 's Grant Advisory Committee , where she assisted in reviewing grant applications submitted by members of the Wikimedia community .
She was involved with Wikimedia 's Global Education Program , assisting students and professors with improving articles about global and United States public policy .
She wrote eight Did You Knows that appeared on the front page of the project , and contributed to two Good Articles , the Washington : A Life article and the Anthony Ashley-Cooper , 10th Earl of Shaftesbury article .
The day prior to her death , she welcomed a number of new users to the project and did other editing tasks like removing copyright violations and cleaning up promotional language found in articles .
A Washington state resident , she was the founder and Executive Director of Catalyst Resource Network , having started the organization in December 2006 .
Members of the Affiliations Committee got together for a breakfast before heading to the conference .
A brief tribute was held at the start of today 's proceedings , which Sefidari described as `` touching '' .
The surviving members of satirical metal band GWAR yesterday announced a charitable arts foundation in the name of Dave Brockie .
Brockie , 50 , died last month .
Founding frontman and singer Brockie spent 30 years leading `` Earth 's only openly extra-terrestrial rock band '' , which actually hailed from Richmond , Virginia .
Their obscene lyrics and theatrical live shows brought fame to Brockie , who went by stage name Oderus Urungus , and the fellow Virginia Commonwealth University art students that made up the band .
A public memorial for Brockie is scheduled for August 15 , and the annual GWAR-B-Q is to go ahead the next day .
Drawing a line between the stage persona and the man who played it , the band add `` Just face it -- Oderus would order you to be present and pay tribute to Dave Murray Brockie , his own personal slave ! ''
Donations can be made at the GWAR-B-Q and via GWAR 's website .
The rubber-costumed band remains to publicly decide if they will continue to perform and record .
They say the foundation 's first task will be to fund and erect a monument `` to provide the world with a place to pay respects to the memory of a very cherished man '' .
Chilean president Michelle Bachelet declared an emergency , with the army coordinating the evacuation .
She called the blaze a `` tremendous tragedy '' , noting , `` In some places the fires have started again so we 're working on this and people will continue to be protected '' .
One resident told the Reuters news agency , '' -LSB- w -RSB- e fled from the La Cruz neighborhood , from an apartment I just got not too long ago .
Shelters have been erected to house the thousands fleeing the inferno , and hospitals have been treating hundreds for smoke inhalation .
Yesterday , Ukrainian troops seized an airfield from pro-Russia separatists in the nation 's east .
The attack comes after warnings from officials in Moscow not to interfere with the minority groups in regard to civil unrest .
The acting Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov spoke prior to the mission , stating that it would be `` conducted step by step , responsibly , cautiously '' .
Reports of up to eleven deaths during the seizure have since emerged ; Ukrainian officials have denied the claims .
Geneva is to host an international conference held on Thursday ; it is feared Russia may leave the meeting .
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon 's press office said the secretary-general told Russian President Vladimir Putin he should help `` de-escalate '' the situation .
Eastern Slovak village Buzica , located southwest of Košice on the Slovakian -- Hungarian border , was awarded `` European Stork Village '' by German environmental foundation EuroNatur .
The mayor of Buzica , Jozef Mohňanský , received the award last Saturday .
Mohňanský told the TASR news agency , `` At the moment , we have fifteen stork nests occupied .
In about two-three weeks , more storks will arrive in the village . ''
In 2013 there were eleven breeding pairs recorded .
Storks nest in the village center on electricity poles and on artificial breeding platforms raised by local authorities .
The village holds an annual festival for the arrival of the storks , and has kept a stork census since 1976 .
An important part of local environmental activities is education programme `` Stork '' carried out in local kindergarten and primary school , which regularly issues the school magazine `` Stork '' .
It lies partly in Košice Plain Protected Bird Area -LRB- -LRB- sk -RRB- -RRB- Slovak language : Chránené vtáčie územie Košická kotlina , which was declared on January 7 , 2008 by the Ministry of Environment of the Slovak Republic .
Wetlands near the village naturally attract storks .
Since 1994 EuroNatur has chosen different villages with resident stork colony to award residents ' storks protection activities with the honour of the title `` European Stork Village '' .
The foundation started this initiative to strengthen the stork conservation network .
`` The aim of the European Stork Village award is for these places to become internationally known for their special cultural and natural heritage and to hold up their commitment as an example to others '' , says the foundation 's official report .
The first was the small village of Čigoč in Croatia ; last year the Macedonian municipality of Češinovo-Obleševo was awarded .
Scientists at Chicago 's Field Museum and New York 's American Museum of Natural History have discovered three new species of yellow-shouldered bats , genus Sturnira , in the Neotropics .
On Wednesday open-access journal ZooKeys published their paper on two of the new species , Sturnira bakeri and Sturnira burtonlimi .
The two new species were previously confused with S. ludovici , and S. lilium and S. luisi , respectively .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Did you conduct field study to identify the species ' habits ?
PMV : I have done fieldwork in Belize and Peru , and my coauthor did field work in Brazil , Ecuador , and Peru , where we collected several specimens of Sturnira -LRB- including the third species that has not been described yet -RRB- .
But the two species that were described in the ZooKeys paper are based on specimens collected by our colleagues Dr. Robert Baker from Texas Tech University and Dr. Burton Lim from the Royal Ontario Museum .
The most time consuming part was spending several hours behind the stereoscope looking for the diagnostic characters .
PMV : For this study I collaborated directly with Dr. Bruce Patterson from the Field Museum of Natural History , but studies like this can not be completed without the contribution of scientific collections .
PMV : To keep doing what I love , which is going to the field , working at collections , and collaborating with the wonderful collaborators I have , all of this is an effort to try to understand bat diversity and evolution in the Neotropics , especially why phyllostomid bats are so successful at this .
The researchers identified differences between different specimens , including those in their teeth , skull shapes , and DNA sequences .
Who contributed to this change ?
The third one hopefully will be published later this year .
This brought the number of species of Sturnira to 18 by 2011 .
Along with my coauthor Bruce Patterson , we generated the most comprehensive phylogeny of the genus .
These sequences were obtained from specimens we have collected in the past -LRB- 38 -RRB- and from tissues we borrowed from different natural history collections .
Results of this study found that two subspecies of Sturnira lilium should be recognized as valid species -LRB- S. parvidens and S. paulsoni -RRB- .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- The genus is called Sturnira Gray in the paper .
I 've not seen extra adjectives in genus names , before .
PMV : Usually in papers that deal with taxonomy and nomenclature , the first time that a genus or species is mentioned in text is accompanied by the authority that describes that taxon .
In the case of Sturnira , it was Gray in 1842 that named the genus .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- The paper mentions that the genus is now the most speciose genus in the Neotropical family Phyllostomidae .
Along with another colleague , Burton Lim , we have a paper in press describing a new species based on molecular and morphological data from the Guianan Shield .
Herb Gray , a Canadian former deputy Prime Minister whose federal political career stretched 39 years , died yesterday .
The Liberal was the third longest serving Parliamentarian of the nation .
Nicknamed Gray Herb for his seriousness and The Gray Fog for his ability to deflect questions , Herb was the first Jewish minister in Canada .
James Moore , Conservative current Minister for Industry , tweeted about the `` marvel '' of Gray `` swatting away our questions -LSB- ... -RSB- when we were in opposition . ''
Current Liberal head Justin Trudeau said Gray was a `` great statesman '' who `` left behind an immense legacy unmatched by most in Canadian history '' .
Copps said he was `` an incredible Canadian and a brilliant parliamentarian '' and ex-leader of the Liberals Bob Rae said he `` served Canada with such distinction and care '' .
Current Prime Minister Stephen Harper called Gray `` an honourable parliamentarian who served his country well '' .
Coinciding with Easter Sunday , Glasgow Cannabis Social Club 's annual 420 event was held on Glasgow Green , under sunny blue skies , and overlooking the river Clyde .
Despite the city 's council attempting to revoke permission for the gathering at the last minute , police were happy for it to go-ahead with approximately a dozen officers attending in high-visibility vests .
The Daily Record reported five arrests were made for minor offences , likely smoking and possession of small quantities of cannabis .
Taking a less-sensational -- and more accurate -- line of reporting , the Monday edition of Glasgow 's Evening News stated five were referred to the Procurator Fiscal who is responsible for deciding if charges should be brought .
With people coming and going , Wikinews reporters estimated upwards of 200 attended , compared to nearly 700 who had signed up for the event on Facebook .
Hemp goods were advertised and on sale at the event , and some attendees were seen drinking cannabis-themed energy drinks .
`` I was searched and charged under the Misuse of Drugs Act -LRB- which is a lot of bollocks -RRB- '' one attendee noted online , adding `` not fair to happen on a brilliant day like it was , other than that I had a great day ! ''
A second said they were openly smoking and ignored by police , who `` were only really focusing on people who looked particularly young '' .
Cannabis seeds were openly and legally sold at the event and a hydroponics supplier brought a motortrike towing an advertising trailer .
With the event openly advocating the legalisation of cannabis , speakers put their arguments for this to a receptive crowd .
Retired police officer James Duffy , of Law Enforcement Against Prohibition , spoke of the failed United States alcohol prohibition policy ; stressing such policies needlessly bring people into contact with criminal elements .
Highlighting other countries where legalisation has been implemented , he pointed out such led to lower crime , and lower drug use overall .
One speaker , who produced a bottle of cannabis oil he had received through the post , asserted this cured his prostate cancer .
Others highlighted the current use of Sativex by the National Health Service , with a cost in-excess of # 150 for a single bottle of GW Pharmaceuticals patented spray -- as-compared to the oil shown to the crowd , with a manufacturing cost of approximately # 10 .
The European Space Agency has spotted a pair of supermassive black holes orbiting one another , believed to be the product of two galaxies merging .
The results were published on Tuesday in The Astrophysical Journal .
This is problematic because only younger galaxies where stars are still forming are regular hosts to such events , with most galaxies believed to have a supermassive black hole at the centre .
Mature systems , known as quiescent galaxies , only see items enter black holes from time to time and scientists have to be looking in the right place at the right time to find them .
The discovery dates to June 2010 when Dr Fukun Liu from China 's Peking University noticed an apparent tidal disruption coming from a galaxy known as J120136 .
XMM-Newton was tasked to investigate , as was NASA 's Swift satellite .
The resultant data indicates a pair of black holes orbiting one another .
`` There might be a whole population of quiescent galaxies that host binary black holes in their centers , '' said co-discoverer Stefanie Komossa of Germany 's Max Planck Society .
She said ongoing work to spot tidal disruptions could lead to `` reliable statistics about the rate at which galaxies merge '' .
Ahead of Sunday 's scheduled canonization of Pope John Paul II , in the Italian village of Cevo , a massive stone and wood crucifix dedicated to the late pontiff collapsed , instantly crushing a man to death and landing another in the hospital .
Reports variously say the collapse took place on Wednesday or Thursday .
Marco Gusmini , 21 , died after part of the wood of the crucifix splintered and broke , sending it , along with the attached statue of Jesus Christ , toppling to the ground .
Sculptor Enrico Job designed the crucifix , which stood 100 ft -LRB- 30 m -RRB- tall ; curved unusually to symbolize , reportedly , the scars of World War II ; mounted with a 20 ft -LRB- 6 m -RRB- tall statue of Jesus Christ weighing 1,320 lbs -LRB- 600 kg -RRB- .
Commissioned to commemorate Pope John Paul II 's 1998 visit to Brescia , and reportedly originally erected at a stadium there , the crucifix was moved to its present location in nearby Cevo in 2005 .
Gusmini and his parents reportedly lived on Via Papa Giovanni XXIII , a street in Lovere named after another late pontiff to be canonized alongside Pope John Paul II , Pope John XXIII .
In celebration of this double canonization , Rome is expected to play host to 19 heads of state , 24 heads of government , and some 800,000 Catholic pilgrims , visiting from around the world , according to the Interior Ministry of Italy .
So I am delighted that we are investing in a new polar research ship to carry cutting edge British technology to put British scientists at the forefront of research in both the Antarctic and the Arctic oceans '' .
The icebreaking ship is to belong to the British Antarctic Survey and is funded from a # 7 billion pot earmarked for science over the next six or seven years .
Osborne told those gathered at Cambridge 's Laboratory of Molecular Biology today he had `` made it -LSB- his -RSB- personal priority in government to support -LSB- scientific -RSB- endeavour . ''
Funding body the Natural Environment Research Council -LRB- Nerc -RRB- says the current ships , RRS James Clark Ross and RRS Ernest Shackleton , are to carry on operating at least until 2020 .
The new vessel is intended to be able to stay in the field longer and , unlike RRS James Clark Ross , feature a helipad .
The Russian Parliament passed a new bill on Tuesday to restrict and regulate blogging and social media content , expected to be enforced in August .
The bill comes following Russian actions in Ukraine and a Russian crackdown on domestic criticism .
Under the bill , bloggers with 3000 or more daily views will face a similar level of legal liability as media organisations .
These bloggers will be required to register their identities with Russia 's consumer rights protection agency , Rospotrebnadzor ; they may not spread extremist material or violate citizen privacy , and must undertake fact-checking to verify published content .
Social networking sites , blog hosts , and other `` distributors of information on the internet '' will also be required register with Rospotrebnadzor , and will be expected to store the data of popular users , and provide up to six months of user activity logs on request for possible use in government investigations .
Non-compliance will net fines for private citizens of 3,000 -- 5,000 rubles -LRB- US$ 83 -- US$ 140 -RRB- , officials 30,000 -- 50,000 rubles -LRB- US$ 833 -- US$ 1,388 -RRB- , and businesses 300,000 -- 500,000 rubles -LRB- US$ 8,330 -- US$ 13,888 -RRB- .
The comments have caused an uproar , not just in the NBA , but within the Clippers team .
In protest , players wore their warm-up jerseys inside out before their Game 4 playoff loss against the Golden State Warriors , while in other games throughout the league the San Antonio Spurs played in black socks and the Miami Heat practiced with their warm-up shirts inside out to mimic the LA Clippers .
Former NBA player Kevin Johnson , now mayor of Sacramento , said the league needed to hand out the maximum possible penalty .
While NBA legend Michael Jordan , owner of the Charlotte Bobcats said there is no room in the NBA , or anywhere , for this kind of hatred .
The conversation took place on April 9 , when a man 's voice , later identified as Sterling 's , told the woman not to pose for photos with black men , including Hall of Famer Ervin `` Magic '' Johnson .
Sterling goes onto say it annoys him that she has to promote her association with black people .
It is n't the first time Sterling has caused controversy with racist comments .
Back in 2009 he was sued by his former General Manager Elgin Baylor who criticised Sterling 's attitude and quoted him as saying `` I 'm offering you good money for a poor black kid '' when negotiating a contract with Danny Manning .
The situation is far from over as Sterling is refusing to sell the team , and the other teams have lobbied against him to force him to sell .
NBA Commissioner Adam Silver needs 75 % support , or 23 out of the 30 teams , to force Sterling out of the league permanently .
The presenter of BBC 's Newsnight show , Jeremy Paxman , said on Wednesday he is to leave after 25 years .
The BBC said Paxman had postponed his departure , after deciding upon it last summer , because Newsnight was going through `` a difficult period '' .
Paxman became a notorious political interviewer after tearing a great number of political leaders apart : In an interview with Michael Howard regarding the 1995 dismissal of the director of the prison service , Derek Lewis , when Howard did n't directly answer a question , Paxman asked again -- eleven more times .
In an interview with Tony Blair , he asked Blair whether he prayed with US president George W. Bush .
More recently , when Conservative MP and junior minister Chloe Smith appeared on the show to defend a change in fuel duty policy , Paxman showed she was apparently too too junior to have any knowledge of the decision making process .
Gerry Adams , the leader of the Irish republican party Sinn Féin , was arrested Wednesday by the Police Service of Northern Ireland as part of an investigation of the 1972 disappearance and murder of Jean McConville , a mother of ten .
McConville was taken from her flat in Divis in west Belfast shortly before Christmas of 1972 , then shot .
The Irish Republican Army -LRB- IRA -RRB- later admitted to the abduction and killing .
A statement from the police said : `` Detectives from the serious crime branch investigating the abduction and murder of Jean McConville in 1972 have arrested a 65-year-old man in Antrim .
The suspect is currently being interviewed by detectives at the serious crime suite in Antrim police station . ''
Adams has said he is `` innocent of any part '' of the murder of McConville : `` I believe that the killing of Jean McConville and the secret burial of her body was wrong and a grievous injustice to her and her family .
The Sinn Féin leader 's arrest follows the release of audio tapes held by Boston College containing oral history from former members of the republican movement including members of the IRA .
A number of arrests have been made following the release of the ` Belfast Project ' tapes .
Richard Desmond , the owner of Britain 's Channel 5 , will reportedly sell the channel to US media company Viacom for an estimated # 450m .
Viacom also owns TV channels Comedy Central , MTV , and Nickelodeon .
Desmond 's Northern & Shell -- which also owns the Daily Express and Daily Star newspapers -- bought Channel 5 from the German broadcaster RTL in 2010 for # 103.5 m. Desmond has made the channel profitable returning # 26m of profits in the first half of 2013 .
The channel has cut costs , improved its ad sales operation , and acquired the rights for the reality show Big Brother until the end of 2014 .
BT , ITV , and Channel 4 have contemplated purchasing the network but declined .
Last month , Discovery Communications withdrew a bid reportedly worth between # 250m and # 300m .
The Central Narcotics Bureau -LRB- CNB -RRB- of Singapore announced yesterday the first arrests made following the listing of New Psychoactive Substances -LRB- NPS -RRB- as Class A controlled drugs on Thursday , under the First Schedule of the Misuse of Drugs Act .
The suspects , two unnamed male Singaporeans , aged 22 and 23 , were reportedly arrested at a shopping center in Tampines on Friday evening for possession of synthetic cannabis , also known as `` K2 '' .
Authorities recovered 71.7 g of the drug from the suspects .
Synthetic cannabis , listed as an NPS , and known as a `` legal high '' , is one of a group of designer drugs created to stimulate the effects of controlled drugs including cocaine , Ecstasy , methamphetamine , and heroin .
The CNB has linked NPS abuse to symptoms including severe intoxication , hallucinations , paranoia , seizures , cadiovascular problems , renal failure , and death .
Typically having chemical structure very similar but slightly different from controlled drugs , these substances have been illegalized , and their possession , consumption , trafficking , and manufacturing now carry penalties comparable to that of controlled drugs .
Last year , under the Fifth Schedule of the Misuse of Drugs Act , designed to study NPSs before their illegalization , they could be confiscated by authorities , but no further penalty would be levied .
The changes to NPS status follow increases over the past year in NPS trafficking and consumption , according to the CNB .
Commenting on the move , a spokesperson for the CNB revealed the organization has reported at least thirty NPS seizures in the period from last May through this February .
Termed an `` alarming new drug problem '' by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime , its World Drug Report 2013 indicated an increase to 348 NPSs in 2013 , up from 251 in 2012 .
Capitalizing on their legality -- which no longer holds in Singapore -- NPSs have been known as `` legal highs '' , `` research chemicals '' , `` plant food '' , and `` bath salts '' .
With the abuse and trafficking of NPS on the rise , listing these new psychoactive substances as Class A controlled drugs signals our unequivocal stance that these substances are illegal and no different from other controlled drugs . ''
One question initially directed at Pyne from the audience was given to former parliamentary speaker Anna Burke to discuss first .
When she started to answer , students unfurled a banner behind her reading `` More brains , not warplanes -- Fund education '' .
This was accompanied by rhyming slogans shouted from the crowd of students including the phrase : `` No cuts .
Unable to quell the protesters , the ABC briefly cut the program to air a musical segment from a previous show , while removing the protesters from the building .
Upon return to the broadcast , about two minutes later , the host Tony Jones apologised for the incident : `` Apologies to the minister , apologies to everyone on the panel , apologies to the wider audience watching -LSB- ... -RSB- This is not what we want to happen on the program , that is not what democracy is all about and those students should understand that . ''
The commission proposed to raise tuition costs by 14 % and require repayment of the HECS loan starting at minimum wage , A$ 32,354 , according to Gwilym Croucher of the University of Melbourne .
The commission also proposed to reduce Commonwealth subsidies down to 45 % .
Listed in eBay 's `` really weird '' category , the carcass was considered by eBay to be an example of `` items made from marine mammals regardless of when the product was made '' , which are prohibited as per site rules .
Following a council meeting on Sunday in the town of 950 residents , Cape St. George 's mayor , Peter Fenwick , put the whale up on the auction site in a bid to have it removed from the town 's premises , citing a lack of cooperation from provincial and federal government officials on the matter .
`` It 's your problem , you solve it '' , Fenwick recounted to The Globe and Mail -LRB- TGaM -RRB- as the response he received from them .
Apart from eBay , Kijiji was also suggested as another avenue by which to sell the carcass .
Fenwick told CTV News , several years prior another sperm whale measuring 15 ft was beached in the area , but disappeared without incident , an act Fenwick attributed to be the work of Fisheries and Oceans Canada .
`` This time '' , he remarked , `` the authorities have told us that it 's our whale , it 's our responsibility to get rid of it . ''
On putting the carcass for sale , Fenwick remarked , `` We knew we had to do something with it and this seemed to be the least expensive way of disposing of it . ''
In a news release , Fenwick highlighted a possible use for the carcass , particularly its bones .
`` The 40 foot sperm whale will make a spectacular exhibit once the fat and muscle is removed , and the town is asking museums and other organizations that could use a whale skeleton to contact the town for further details . ''
On retaining the whale himself , Fenwick stated , `` As a town we would dearly love to keep the whale and put it on exhibit in the town but the cost of such a venture would be hard to justify . ''
Fenwick told TGaM the whale was `` in half decent shape '' .
`` This one looks like it died very recently and has n't decomposed much '' , which Fenwick suggested elsewhere was due to the whale 's present location , partially submerged in near-freezing water .
However , Fenwick noted its close proximity to a residential area , saying homeowners who lived there were `` very interested in seeing the whale gone . ''
eBay was not the only organization who barred the sale from taking place .
`` We also got threatened by the federal department of the environment , and told to pull the ad off or they would prosecute us '' , said Fenwick on the opposition he said he received from Environment Canada , which viewed the sale as contravening a federal act designed to protect endangered species .
`` I received a call from the federal department of the environment saying that you 're not allowed to sell any parts of sperm whales , even if they 're dead . ''
Fenwick 's request was met with a negative response from Environment Canada .
`` They 've got to sort it out somehow .
The uncertainty means it just sort of sits there and rots . ''
Once decomposition sets in , Fenwick remarked the carcass would become a `` real nuisance '' .
On finding alternate means to dispose of the carcass , Wayne Ledwell , a member of Newfoundland 's Whale Release and Strandings , suggested the whale be towed out to a remote area .
`` They need to do that right away , when they come in and they 're fresh , '' said Ledwell .
`` No one wants to go touch them ... everything becomes gooey and slippery and you ca n't stand up on the whale and it gets on your boots and you ca n't get the smell off and then you go home and the dog rolls in it and you get it in your kitchen and you curse the whales , and you curse the government and ... it becomes a mess . ''
Fenwick said they 'd considered the idea , enlisting a local fisherman who , however , judged his engine too small for the job .
Previously , blue whale carcasses washed ashore in the towns of Trout River and Rocky Harbour , located about 150 km further north , and were taken by Royal Ontario Museum for preservation of the skeletons .
Fenwick suggested the sperm whale carcass in his town might also meet a similar fate , as the sperm whale 's status as the largest toothed whale might prove to be a drawing attraction for such a facility .
Regarding what he plans to do next with the carcass , Fenwick said `` If we 're not allowed to sell it , we 're willing to drop our 99 cent price down to a zero . ''
He also said he hoped the publicity from the town 's predicament , which garnered national attention , and its unusual means of finding a solution , would draw in someone interested in taking the whale off his hands at their own expense .
The USA Freedom Act , introduced in to the US House of Representatives as HR 3361 and to the US Senate as S. 1599 , on Thursday passed out of House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and on to the House floor .
Foreign Policy reported the bill was `` the most aggressive NSA reform bill under consideration in Congress '' , however , after amendment , the bill has been questioned for extending the Patriot Act and the reduction of reform to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act .
In May 2014 , the US House Judiciary Committee posted a `` Manager 's Amendment '' on its website .
Title VII of the Amendment read `` Section 102 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- of the USA Patriot Improvement and Reauthorization Act of 2005 -LRB- 50 U.S.C. 1805 note -RRB- is amended by striking ` June 1 , 2015 ' and inserting ` December 31 , 2017 ' '' , extending the USA PATRIOT Act through the end of 2017 .
A number of organizations have taken stances against the Patriot Act , for example , the American Library Association became so concerned it urged its members to defend free speech and protect patrons ' privacy against the Act .
According to Deputy Attorney General James Cole , even if the Freedom Act becomes law , the NSA could continue its bulk collection of American 's phone records .
He explained that `` it 's going to depend on how the -LSB- FISA -RSB- court interprets any number of the provisions '' contained within the legislation .
The Administration and the intelligence community believe they can do whatever they want , regardless of the laws Congress passes , so long they can convince one of the judges appointed to the secretive Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court -LRB- FISC -RRB- to agree .
Cynthia Wong of Human Rights Watch -LRB- HRW -RRB- expressed concern that `` the bill does not address needed reforms to surveillance programs that affect millions of people outside US borders . ''
This being a key problem that plagues US surveillance activities according to HRW .
Mike Rogers , a defender of the NSA 's surveillance practices and the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee , called the proposed amendments a `` huge improvement '' .
On the other hand , USA Freedom Act co-author and Senate Committee on the Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy commented that he `` remain concerned that the legislation approved today does not include some of the important reforms related to national security letters , a strong special advocate at the FISA Court , and greater transparency .
I will continue to push for those reforms when the Senate Judiciary Committee considers the USA FREEDOM Act this summer . ''
Roughly 300 protesters turned up yesterday for the return of Nigel Farage , leader of the UK Independence Party , to Edinburgh after last year 's disastrous attempt at a press conference in a pub at the foot of The Canongate .
Unseen by protesters or public , Farage is believed to have left the venue around 7:30 pm .
Given the hostile reception on his last visit , far-right group Britain First garnered publicity earlier in the week with an apparent offer of `` armoured vehicles '' for Farage 's visit .
Despite attempts to keep the location secret , the Radical Independence Campaign began calling for protesters to turn up on Friday , at the city 's Corn Exchange , nearly a week before the event .
Farage was already believed to be inside the building when Wikinews arrived shortly after 4:30 pm .
At that time , five satellite trucks were present and New Market Road , running past the venue , was still open to traffic .
Protesters began arriving en-masse closer to 5:30 pm , with numbers peaking around an hour later .
Police vans were moved to block the road ; although , traffic to the venue was still being permitted for a wedding party with the misfortune to pick the same date as Farage 's only visit to Scotland during the current European Parliament election campaign .
Several speakers addressed the crowd protesting against UKIP being in Scotland , with the actual number of UKIP attendees inside , to hear Farage speak , estimated at around 50 .
One speaker , a schoolteacher , challenged the mainstream media 's acceptance of UKIP 's assertion the party is not racist , stating her primary school pupils were more-capable of identifying racism and would be pointing its presence out within UKIP were they present .
Although loud , the protest passed peacefully .
Chants directed at UKIP included `` Whose streets ?
, `` Say it loud , say it clear : Refugees are welcome here ! ''
Other taunts called UKIP `` scum '' , urged people to `` smash the SDL '' -LRB- Scottish Defence League -RRB- , and clearly labelled UKIP and its supporters as racist .
On Saturday , Hendrick Motorsports driver Jeff Gordon won the 2014 5-hour Energy 400 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series race at Kansas Speedway .
Starting the race in thirteenth , Gordon claimed his 89th career win , first of the 2014 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series season , and third at the track .
The race was the first Sprint Cup Series night race held at the track .
Pole-sitter Kevin Harvick dominated for the majority of the race , and had placed almost a third of the 43-car field behind a lap when he performed a pit stop on lap 42 ; Harvick would lead on 119 laps , the most of any driver in the race .
By lap 236 , cars began making green-flag pit stops , which led to Brad Keselowski taking the lead , but was forced to make his stop with nine laps remaining .
As a result , Gordon took the lead , and defeated Harvick by .112 seconds .
Carl Edwards , Danica Patrick , Aric Almirola , Jimmie Johnson , and Matt Kenseth rounded out the top ten .
After the race , Gordon led the points standings with 394 points , followed by Kenseth with 379 .
The driver was arrested on suspicion of causing death by dangerous driving following fatal injury of two elderly women when the coach reportedly hit a wall .
A further seven passengers , seriously injured in the crash , were hospitalised .
The cause of the crash is not yet known although police say they are investigating the incident , in which no vehicle other than the coach was involved .
The passengers were travelling on a coach trip from Exmouth to Looe with Age UK .
Sutton , himself a cancer sufferer , gained media attention in the UK for his fundraising activities for Teenage Cancer Trust , which have raised more than # 3.3 million -LRB- US$ 5.5 million or $ 4 million -RRB- for the charity .
His mother said he died in his sleep during the early hours of this morning .
Sutton 's mother broke the news in a post on ` Stephen 's story ' , the Facebook page launched in January 2013 in which Sutton documented events in his life .
`` My heart is bursting with pride but breaking with pain for my courageous , selfless , inspirational son '' , she wrote .
`` The ongoing support and outpouring of love for Stephen will help greatly at this difficult time , in the same way as it helped Stephen throughout his journey .
Previous posts on the Facebook page spoke of Sutton 's deteriorating condition .
Yesterday a post on the same Facebook page said : `` Unfortunately in the last 24 hours Stephen 's condition has deteriorated to where he can no longer communicate through this page himself .
Unfortunately the breathlessness which had him re-admitted to hospital is due to the regrowth of tumours which are blocking his airways , and not just due to infection as we had all been hoping . ''
However , the update also said he was `` comfortable and stable '' .
Sutton , from the town of Burntwood in the West Midlands of England , was told he was suffering from a metastatic colorectal cancer at the age of 15 .
On a JustGiving page , Sutton explained why he was raising money for his chosen charity .
`` They offer hope and a sense of community to young people with cancer like myself , and directly help face associated pragmatic and emotional issues . ''
Sutton 's campaign received numerous celebrity endorsements , including from Stephen Fry , Russell Brand and Simon Cowell .
Comedian Jason Manford also arranged comedy gigs to assist with Sutton 's campaign .
On Twitter today , the Teenage Cancer Trust said : `` We are humbled and hugely grateful for what Stephen achieved and continues to achieve for us . ''
Jason Manford paid his own tribute to Sutton .
`` Stephen Sutton was the most inspiring person I 've ever met and touched more lives than he will ever know '' , he said .
Some of Stephen 's words will stay with me and others forever and they are words to live by -- ` life is n't measured in time , it 's measured in achievements ' . ''
One sign said `` Contra la Impunidad Solidaridad con las víctimas del Franquismo '' , which translates to `` Against Impunity , Solidarity with victims of the Franco regime '' .
The protest started with speakers on a megaphone , and was followed by a march around the plaza several times with the leaders holding a large banner .
They were followed by people chanting , holding flags of the Second Spanish Republic , and holding placards .
Earlier today , the Australian women 's semi-professional basketball team Canberra Capitals announced a formal transfer of the club to University of Canberra .
Prior to the transfer , the Women 's National Basketball League -LRB- WNBL -RRB- club was owned and operated by Basketball Australian Capital Territory -LRB- BACT -RRB- .
The deal includes the WNBL operating license , and involves the team being renamed to the University of Canberra Capitals .
The transfer still requires formal approval from Basketball Australia and the WNBL Commission .
It does not include ownership of other BACT teams including the Capitals Academy SEABL team , the Canberra Gunners , and the Gunners Academy .
The Capitals have failed to qualify for the WNBL finals for the past three years , and current head coach and former national team coach Carrie Graf says the change will improve the team 's potential for success .
She is quoted in a Basketball ACT press release saying , `` The University is committed to supporting women in sport where often female athletes are unable to dedicate themselves to their sport in the same way as male athletes .
The transfer will enable Capitals players to establish flexible working , living and studying arrangements through the University so that they are able to have a stronger focus on basketball while at the same time preparing for life after basketball . ''
The Canberra Times reports the ownership change will make it easier for the team to recruit top young talent as the team will be able to provide food , housing , tuition , and a basketball salary .
On the reported downside , University of Canberra chief executive Joe Roff has said the University will not be able to increase player salaries .
Yesterday , Partido Popular candidate for the European Parliament Miguel Arias Cañete said of his performance during the previous night 's debate against Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party 's Elena Valenciano on Spanish television 's Antena 3 program Espejo Público , `` Debating with a woman is complicated .
Cañete went on to say , `` If I was debating with Señor Rubalcaba , we can say all kinds of barbaric things , but with a woman it 's interpreted differently . ''
Valenciano took to Twitter while the show aired to say , `` So ?
Remove women from debate ?? ''
The quote was read live to Cañete , who responded by saying , `` For me , it is more difficult , it is harder . ''
Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party boss Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba responded on Twitter , saying , `` Cañete , the machismo of the sore loser . ''
Both politicians spent most of the debate focusing on the failings of the other 's political party .
Neither politician talked much about corruption , Catalonia or Europe .
The topic of abortion was brought up and discussed by Valenciano , but before Cañete had the chance to respond to her remarks , the debate televiser RTVE cut to commercial .
Partido Popular had supported changes in abortion law that were viewed as controversial , and led to protests by several thousand people claiming the changes encroached on the rights of women .
In the debate , Valenciano said Partido Popular had suspended their efforts to change the law in order to win this election .
Power in India is set to transfer to the Bharatiya Janata Party -LRB- BJP -RRB- and the leader Narendra Modi following an election in the world 's largest democracy .
The ruling Congress Party conceded defeat yesterday and BJP are set to win a healthy majority of seats .
The success for the Hindu nationalist party in the election tracks predicted results from exit polls .
Following the victory , Modi posted on social networking site Twitter `` India has won .
He then visited his mother to seek her blessing : he touched her feet , she put a vermillion mark on his head and gave him sweets .
Thereafter , Modi travelled from his home in the Indian state of Gujarat to Delhi .
In Delhi , a victory parade was held for Modi .
US President Barack Obama and UK Prime Minister David Cameron have both congratulated Modi and invited him to visit Washington and London respectively .
Nawaz Sharif , the prime minister of Pakistan , said BJP had won an `` impressive victory '' .
Modi has been controversial since a violent riot erupted in Gujarat in 2002 which led to the death of about a thousand people , primarily Muslims .
Modi 's critics allege he let the inter-religious violence happen without much effort to stop it .
In 2012 , a Special Investigations Team appointed by the Indian Supreme Court found no evidence for Modi 's role in the violence .
Following this , the British high commissioner in India decided to reconnect with Modi and invite him to visit London to address the House of Commons .
The United States has warmed up to Modi again and in February he met with Nancy Powell , the US ambassador to India .
During the elections , Modi attempted to reassure Muslims that he would protect all religious groups in India , telling The Times of India : `` I 've to run the government .
Governments run on the basis of Constitution .
The outgoing Prime Minister Manmohan Singh released a statement : `` As I have said on many occasions , my life and tenure in public office are an open book .
In an interview to be aired on Sky News today , he said the housing market is the `` biggest risk '' to the economy and has `` deep , deep structural problems '' .
Of house building he said : `` There are not sufficient houses built in the UK .
To go back to Canada , there are half as many people in Canada as in the UK , twice as many houses are built every year in Canada as in the UK and we ca n't influence that . ''
`` We 're not going to build a single house at the Bank of England .
Carney also said the Bank of England would look into the procedures used to issue loans and mortgages to see if they were being granted appropriately : `` We 'd be concerned if there was a rapid increase in high loan-to-value mortgages across the banks .
We 've seen that creeping up and it 's something we 're watching closely . ''
Kris Hopkins responded to Carney on behalf of the government , saying the government `` inherited a broken housing market , but our efforts to fix it are working '' .
We 've also helped homebuyers get on the housing ladder , because if people can buy homes builders will build them .
Last year councils gave permission for almost 200,000 new homes under the locally-led planning system and more than 1,000 communities have swiftly taken up neighbourhood planning .
Earlier this month , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development called on the UK government to `` tighten '' access to the ` Help to Buy ' scheme introduced by George Osborne and the coalition government in 2013 .
Darling said : `` Unless supply can be increased substantially , we will exacerbate that situation with schemes like Help to Buy . ''
An anti-budget protest descended on Brisbane , Australia today in response to this past Tuesday 's federal budget .
Mr. Bartlett conveyed to the crowd that the Australian Greens would do everything in their power to block the budget legislation in parliament .
Senator Moore was not heard stating similar of the ALP but spoke passionately against the budget .
The singer appeared speaking at a national art workers rally in Pyongyang .
She expressed her support for Kim 's governance and her dedication to help `` stoke up the flame for art and creative work '' .
Hyon was first reported dead in August last year by South Korean newspapers , among them Chosun Ilbo with reported ties to South Korean intelligence services .
She was reportedly executed along with eleven other performers for creating and distributing sex tapes of themselves , including performers from Unhasu Orchestra , the Wangjaesan Light Music Band , and the Moranbong Band .
Reports suggested Hyon had run afoul of Kim 's wife , Ri Sol-ju .
A report attributed to Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun stated Hyon and the other performers were executed to suppress rumors Ri had behaved decadently during her time as an entertainer .
News of Hyon 's execution was supported last October by Nam Jae-Joon , the director of South Korea 's National Intelligence Service , who reportedly expressed awareness of an execution , according to two South Korean MPs , during a closed parliamentary session : `` We are aware of the execution of some ten people associated with the Unhasu Orchestra . ''
Reports said the execution was witnessed , as a mandatory lesson , by bands pioneering the `` new wave '' of music that rose to prominence in the country following the ascension of Kim Jong-un to North Korean leadership .
Prior to her supposed execution , Hyon had enjoyed popularity in North Korea ; her songs included `` The Footsteps of Soldiers '' , `` I Love Pyongyang '' , and , notably , `` Excellent Horse Like Lady '' .
All three songs contained patriotic themes .
Purportedly , Hyon was Kim Jong-un 's girlfriend some years ago , but the relationship ended due to disapproval by Kim Jong-un 's father , then-Supreme Leader Kim Jong-il and she later married and had a child with an army officer .
A federal court struck down as unconstitutional Pennsylvania 's 1996 law banning same-sex marriage today .
Judge John E. Jones III has ordered the state to start issuing licenses for same-sex couples .
The lawsuit was brought by the American Civil Liberties Union in July of last year .
Lawyers argued the state 's ban violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution .
Pennsylvania 's attorney general , Kathleen Kane , did not attempt to defend the ban , and has said she considers the law unconstitutional .
Kane said today 's decision `` brings justice to Pennsylvanians who have suffered from unequal protection under the law because of their sexual orientation '' .
The decision in Pennsylvania followed a similar decision yesterday in Oregon striking down that state 's marriage ban .
Courts in a number of other states including Arkansas , Idaho , Michigan , Oklahoma , Texas , and Utah have found state-level bans on same-sex marriage unconstitutional , although some of these decisions have not led to gay , lesbian and bisexual couples being able to marry while appeals are ongoing .
China 's Central Government Procurement Center , citing Microsoft 's shutdown of Windows XP security support on April 8 , issued a notice this week banning use of the Windows 8 operating system -LRB- OS -RRB- on new desktops , laptops and tablets by government agencies .
Personal machines are not affected by the ban .
Microsoft has officially responded to the notice and expressed their desire to continue providing assistance in reaching a solution .
`` Microsoft has been working proactively with the Central Government Procurement Center and other government agencies through the evaluation process to ensure that our products and services meet all government procurement requirements '' , said a Microsoft spokesperson .
Microsoft has also reportedly said their earlier operating systems such as Windows 7 would still be made available to the Chinese government .
Chinese software security companies have offered their assistance in maintaining security standards for Windows XP following Miscrosoft 's shutdown .
Xinhua reported Linux based operating systems are in development for the Chinese market , and the announcement presents business opportunities for those working in the information technology sector .
Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif has today announced he will attend Monday 's swearing-in ceremony of India 's next Prime Minister , Narendra Modi .
In the history of India-Pakistan bilateral relations , the leader of one country has not visited the swearing-in ceremony of a leader of the other since 1947 , when the two countries became independent .
`` It is good news that -LSB- Sharif -RSB- is visiting India '' , said Raashid Alvi , the Indian opposition party Indian National Congress leader ; `` It is an opportunity to hold meeting with him and important issues should be raised . ''
Prakash Javadekar , spokesperson for Modi 's Bharatiya Janata Party , said , `` It is very good news that Nawaz Sharif has accepted Modi 's invitation .
This will mark a start of a new relationship between India and Pakistan '' .
In a Mass given in Manger Square of Bethlehem Pope Francis told crowds , `` Building peace is difficult , but living without peace is a constant torment .
Pope Francis started his visit in Jordan and from there he continued to the Palestinian city of Bethlehem .
In Bethlehem he met with Mahmoud Abbas , president of the Palestinian National Authority , as well as leading Mass in the crowded Manger Square .
He unexpectedly stopped near the concrete separation wall between Bethlehem and Jerusalem , at a spot sprayed with graffiti , got out of his vehicle , and touched the wall with his forehead .
Regarding the peace process , Pope Francis emphasized that peace `` must resolutely be pursued , even if each side has to make certain sacrifices '' .
After his visit to the West Bank the Pope journeyed to Tel Aviv where he was welcomed by Shimon Peres and Benjamin Netanyahu , the Israeli Prime Minister .
The Pope continued from there to Jerusalem to visit the Western Wall , the most holy site to the Jewish people , while he was escorted by an Argentine rabbi and the leader of the Muslim community of Argentina .
The Pope 's 55-hour trip included over 30 events .
Two sinkholes have opened near the Australian northern coastal city of Newcastle , New South Wales , in the last two days .
The first appeared yesterday with another opening today , both developing by houses on Lambton Parade in the suburb of Swansea Heads .
The first hole swallowed tonnes of material in two hours next to a married couple 's home before they returned to discover it .
The Mine Subsidence Board is investigating the two sinkholes and safety of other homes in the area .
Dozens of homes have been built over the mine since its closure .
The house involved in the first , larger sinkhole dates from the 1990s , making it relatively new on the street , and the damage to it may be fixable , according to mine subsidence board members .
Noosa went ahead at ten minutes with a penalty goal .
Uni would relinquish the lead for the remainder of the half .
The second half had seven minutes of added time due to injuries .
Noosa opened the half 's scoring at twenty minutes , going ahead 13 -- 12 with an unconverted try .
University scored a penalty goal nine minutes later .
Police in China announced yesterday the arrests of six people who reportedly pled guilty to murdering a woman by bludgeoning her to death at a McDonald 's restaurant in the city of Zhaoyuan , Shandong province .
Police said they believed the suspects , who included a man , his reportedly twelve-year-old son , and two daughters , along with two other women , were members of a cult known as Quannengshen , Chinese meaning `` All-powerful spirit '' .
Video footage of the assault has been uploaded to the internet , along with photos of Wu motionless on the floor of the restaurant in a pool of blood .
Though taken to hospital , Wu , who was reportedly the mother of a young son , died .
The incident has drawn the criticism of netizens online , who highlighted the presence of dozens of other customers in the restaurant who stood by and filmed the assault , while doing nothing to stop the attack or assist the victim .
According to the newspaper Southern Metropolis Daily , Quannengshen , a doomsday cult which bases its ideology on the Christian Bible , began about twenty years ago in Heilongjiang province and now has members based in the eastern provinces of China .
Reportedly the Chinese government declared the group an illegal `` evil cult '' in 1995 .
In December 2012 , according to a report by the Beijing Morning News , seventeen cultists were arrested in Beijing for harassing people with an apocalyptic message in a public park .
The incident comes amid ongoing efforts by the Chinese government to control religious movements who base their teachings on Christianity and Buddhism .
Another group , Falungong , also illegalized as an `` evil cult '' , was suppressed by the government in 1999 , and reportedly had a membership of millions .
The government has detained tens of thousands of Falungong members and , according to the group , tortured members for their beliefs .
McDonald 's has released a statement on its Chinese microblog , expressing `` deep-felt grief '' for the incident , along with a promise the company would conduct an investigation .
Chinese state news agency Xinhua quoted Shandong authorities , `` Local provincial police authorities vowed to severely punish illegal activities of heretic sects to protect the safety of people 's lives and property '' .
When the Associated Press contacted the police headquarters in Zhaoyuan , they were told by a clerk there was no one available for comment .
The popular video sharing website was banned along with social media platform Twitter after leakage though the services in March of audio recordings of government meetings .
The recordings , whose release Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan called treasonous , presented military discussions of Turkish intervention in Syria .
Other leaked recordings presented alleged corruption among close associates of Mr Erdogan .
Following the ousting of Thailand 's Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra from power , those seeking to peacefully protest the imposition of a military junta in the country on May 22 have adopted a gesture found in The Hunger Games book and film series , curling the little finger and thumb into the palm and raising the three middle fingers in the air .
Use of the gesture as a form of protest began last weekend in Bangkok , the capital of the country .
This form of protest has drawn the attention of Thailand 's military junta , the National Council for Peace and Order , who announced its intent on Tuesday to arrest protestors who display the gesture , in violation of orders to stop .
Speaking on behalf of the junta , Colonel Weerachon Sukhondhapatipak said to the Associated Press , `` At this point we are monitoring the movement .
If it is an obvious form of resistance , then we have to control it so it does n't cause any disorder in the country . ''
In a comment to the Bangkok Post , Thai army Colonel Winthai Suwaree shared a similar sentiment : '' -LSB- The junta -RSB- must look at -LSB- the protester 's -RSB- intention , what they want to communicate and surrounding circumstances '' .
Nonetheless , in the wake of the coup , the United States Department of State -LRB- DoS -RRB- advised `` U.S. citizens reconsider any non-essential travel to Thailand , particularly Bangkok '' .
The DoS also informed US citizens to stay away from groups of protestors , citing that `` even demonstrations that are meant to be peaceful can turn confrontational and escalate into violence . ''
Other restrictions placed on citizens by the junta include internet censorship and restrictions on television broadcasts .
Solitary displays of the gesture was among a few forms of protest utilized by the Thai people in Bangkok on Sunday , amid the placement of almost 6000 soldiers and police officers by the junta in an effort to suppress protests .
Other displays of defiance included protestors banding together in flash mobs or peacefully walking through the central shopping district donning masks in an attempt to bypass security forces stationed there .
The gesture finds its origins in The Hunger Games series , where it was a sign of thanks , admiration , and farewell to a loved one , later gaining significance , in the second book Catching Fire , as a symbol of rebellion against the totalitarian government of Panem .
Protesters , however , have found their own ways of deriving meaning behind the gesture , with some reportedly interpreting it as standing for liberté , égalité , fraternité , values popularized by the French Revolution .
A purported alternative interpretation by protesters held the gesture stood for freedom , election , and democracy .
Still others have created a photo montage of the gesture with a picture from the source movie , which circulated online , with the caption `` 1 .
Manik Sethisuwan has taken to Twitter with this message : `` Dear #HungerGames .
Sombat Boonngam-anong , a social activist who has made efforts to rally the Thai people in continued protest , offered his own interpretation of the gesture on Facebook .
`` Raising three fingers has become a symbol in calling for fundamental political rights '' .
Sombat belongs to the `` Red Shirts '' , a protest group which has supported Shinawatra 's government and the earlier government of Thaksin Shinawatra , her brother , and conducted protests amid prosecution by the junta .
`` Let 's escalate the anti-coup movement three times a day together , '' said Sombat .
Weerachon expressed awareness of the gesture 's origins , stating `` We know it comes from the movie , and let 's say it represents resistance against the authorities .
-LSB- ... -RSB- If a single individual raises three fingers in the air , we are not going to arrest him or her .
On Sunday , protestors were reportedly detained for that reason .
The decision to criminalize displays of the gesture have drawn the criticism of Human Rights Watch , stating it expresses `` a mindset that views human rights with disdain , and sees youthful defiance as the enemy . ''
Human Rights Watch 's Asia director , Brad Adams , remarked : `` The Thai military 's assault on basic human rights has apparently grown to not only target peaceful protesters but now also silent ones as well -- since now just holding up an arm with a three-finger salute is enough to earn the junta 's ire '' .
The National Council for Peace and Order has stated it imposed military rule over the country due to political deadlock resulting from demonstrations spanning seven months , which occasionally erupted into violence .
Last year , on the volatile political situation in Thailand , scholar Nicholas Farrelly wrote in the Australian Journal of International Affairs : `` Each year , Thailand tends to experience at least one period of frenzied coup speculation .
Coups clearly still play a major role in Thai mainstream politics . ''
Three police officers have been shot dead and two have been injured in a shooting in Moncton , New Brunswick .
Police have said the single gunman started shooting following a call to the police last night at around 19:20 local time -LRB- 2320 UTC -RRB- and is still being pursued by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police .
The police have said they are looking for a 24-year-old man named Justin Bourque who they believe to be `` armed and dangerous '' .
Bourque has been depicted as dressed in camouflage clothing and carrying firearms .
Bourque was an employee of a local Wal-Mart store until he was fired in 2010 .
Caitlin Isaac , a former colleague of Bourque , said he `` always seemed to have a problem with authority '' but otherwise `` seemed friendly enough '' .
Isaac said Bourque lost his job because of `` attitude related issues , being defiant , not doing what he was supposed to be doing '' .
Issac also recalled a camping trip with Bourque : `` A few people from work went camping one weekend , and he came , and brought his rifle with him , which he held onto the whole night while drinking .
A Facebook account allegedly belonging to Bourque contains a number of pro-gun and anti-police posts .
The Facebook account has reportedly added two new friends during the shooting .
The police have asked residents in Moncton to not post their observations of events on social media sites .
Queen Elizabeth II formally reopened Parliament on Wednesday and announced the legislative agenda of the UK government for the final year of the Coalition 's five year term .
Caroline Lucas , Green Party MP , spoke in opposition to the fracking proposals after the Queen 's Speech : `` Not only does this bill defy public opinion , it denies people a voice .
To allow fracking companies to drill under people 's homes and land without their permission is to ignore public interest in pursuit of the vested interests of a few . ''
A poll conducted by YouGov found 74 % of respondents opposed the plans .
Labour leader Ed Miliband said : `` We would have a Queen 's Speech with legislation which would make work pay , reform our banks , freeze energy bills and build homes again in Britain .
A Queen 's Speech which signals a new direction for Britain , not one which offers more of the same . ''
Liberal Democrat president Tim Farron said of the Queen 's Speech : `` I suspect the pensions proposals will be around for a generation or more and will be remembered .
Angus Robertson , the leader of the Scottish National Party in Westminster , said the Queen 's Speech barely mentioned Scotland : `` The absence of any mention at all of the Westminster parties ' plans for Scotland in the Queen 's Speech is extraordinary .
-LSB- ... -RSB- In this -- the year of the biggest opportunity in Scotland 's history -- Scotland hardly even gets a nod at Westminster , and not a single mention of future plans for improving government in Scotland . ''
The next year of legislative changes would , the speech claimed , `` deliver on -LSB- the government 's -RSB- long-term plan to build a stronger economy and a fairer society '' .
On economics , it promised the government would continue to lower taxes , produce an updated Charter for Budget Responsibility to `` ensure that future governments spend taxpayers ' money responsibly '' , and continue reduction of the deficit .
On employment law , the Queen 's Speech announced reduction in employment tribunal delays and plans to try and `` improve the fairness of contracts for low paid workers '' -- a response to `` zero-hours '' contracts .
The Institute of Directors support reforms to zero-hours contracts , specifically by removing `` exclusivity '' clauses .
The government is also to increase penalties on companies that do not pay employees minimum wage , and reform National Insurance contributions by self-employed people .
The government also plans to extend the ISA and Premium Bond savings schemes and abolish the 10 % tax rate on savings .
The speech also promised more house building , and also to introduce legislation to reduce the use of plastic bags .
The Serious Crime Bill would also include an increase in the sentence for those who bring about `` cyberattacks which result in loss of life , serious illness or injury or serious damage to national security , or a significant risk thereof '' .
Punishment for cyberattacks that cause `` a significant risk of severe economic or environmental damage or social disruption '' would increase from the current ten year maximum tariff to fourteen years .
Constituents would be able to `` recall '' an MP who had been found guilty of misconduct under a proposed law that will be debated .
The Conservative MP Zac Goldsmith described the current plans as `` meaningless '' and said voters had been `` duped '' .
The Bill would force a by-election if 10 % of voters signed a petition within eight weeks , but only if a Commons committee had decided the MP could be recalled .
This latter requirement will make it `` impossible to recall anyone '' according to Goldsmith .
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said he agreed with Goldsmith the bill was not perfect , and he wanted `` a radical California-style recall '' system , but he had settled for a `` modest '' bill to satisfy `` Conservative Party resistance '' .
Goldsmith claimed Clegg had been `` the architect of the current Recall Bill '' .
The speech included measures to make it easier for businesses to engage in hydraulic fracturing -LRB- `` fracking '' -RRB- of shale gas .
The Institute of Directors said laws `` must be updated if the UK is to enjoy the benefits of our shale potential '' , specifically by scrapping laws on trespass to allow the gas extraction to occur .
The British Chamber of Commerce also support such a reform : `` While fracking may be unpalatable to some , it is absolutely essential , and business will support legislative measures to exploit Britain 's shale gas deposits '' .
Activists from Greenpeace fenced off Prime Minister David Cameron 's home in Oxfordshire with a sign reading `` We apologise for any inconvenience while we frack under your home '' , and delivered a # 50 cheque -- identified as the maximum compensation suggested for property owners .
Simon Clydedale from Greenpeace UK said of the fracking proposals : `` The prime minister is about to auction off over half of Britain to the frackers , including national parks and areas of outstanding natural beauty like the Cotswolds .
Fracking wo n't deliver energy on a meaningful scale for years , if ever , by which time we 'll need to have moved away from dirty fossil fuels and towards high-tech clean power if we 're to head off dangerous climate change . ''
The Conservative Party has won the Newark , England by-election but with a reduced majority .
Voters gave 45.03 % of the vote to Robert Jenrick , while the UK Independence Party candidate Roger Helmer came second with 25.91 % of the vote .
Jenrick is a 32-year-old who works as managing director of Christie 's auction house .
After the election result was announced , he said : `` I want to thank the prime minister for his personal support to my campaign and I want to thank the government for its commitment to re-building Britain .
I hope now that I can repay the faith and trust that the people of Newark have put in me as your new member of parliament -- and in the months and years to come I can build a reputation as a strong and effective MP . ''
UKIP 's candidate , Roger Helmer , attracted controversy during the election campaign due to past public statements about the acceptability of homosexuality .
In remarks to The Sun newspaper , he compared considering homosexuality `` distasteful if not viscerally repugnant '' to tea preferences .
Helmer later stated the manner in which his comments were reported showed `` the mainstream media are engaged in a feeding frenzy against UKIP , and are prepared to twist the facts to suit their agenda '' .
UKIP leader Nigel Farage said the party had run a `` stunning campaign '' : `` We 've been up against probably the biggest ever Conservative machine , defending about their 40th safest seat in the country .
If the indications are right , we 'll be celebrating a massive advance for our party . ''
The Liberal Democrat candidate , David Watts , said coming in sixth place `` was n't a good result , but smaller parties often get squeezed in by-elections and that 's what 's happened to us here '' .
He said the independent campaign by Paul Baggaley had got a lot of support , and `` a lot of our voters had transferred to vote against UKIP to make sure UKIP did n't get elected '' .
Yesterday , the Russian chatterbot `` Eugene Goostman '' by a team of Russian and Ukrainian developers became the first machine to pass a Turing test , under the academic event organizers ' interpretation of the test as originally described by British mathematician Alan Turing .
The competition was held at the Royal Society in London , England , and was organized by Kevin Warwick and Huma Shah of the University of Reading to mark the 60th anniversary of Turing 's death on June 7 , 1954 .
In the contest , where Eugene Goostman and four other bots competed , the bot successfully tricked 33 % of the participating judges , which included television actor Robert Llewellyn of the BBC television series Red Dwarf , and John Sharkey , Baron Sharkey , a sponsor of Turing 's 2013 posthumous pardon .
To give the bot a `` believable personality '' , Goostman is portrayed as being a thirteen year-old boy of the Ukraine ; the bot 's head developer Vladimir Veselov stated that this made Goostman `` not too old to know everything and not too young to know nothing '' .
The bot had previously come close to beating the Turing test on several occasions ; it has been a three-time runner-up for the Loebner Prize , and it won a Turing contest at Bletchley Park in 2012 , held to mark the 100th anniversary of Turing 's birth .
Speaking about the achievement , Warwick stated : `` Some will claim that the Test has already been passed .
The words Turing Test have been applied to similar competitions around the world .
However this event involved the most simultaneous comparison tests than ever before , was independently verified and , crucially , the conversations were unrestricted .
A true Turing Test does not set the questions or topics prior to the conversations .
We are therefore proud to declare that Alan Turing 's Test was passed for the first time on Saturday . ''
Although severe rains have hit much of Texas in recent days , the Texas Water Development Board 's latest weekly report indicated 46 % of the state continues to encounter troubling drought conditions .
The report released Monday also indicated , however , conditions were `` moving in the right direction . ''
The report further indicates the state 's reservoirs , an integral part of citizens ' water supply , is still 20 percent below normal .
Large parts of East Texas experienced heavy rains earlier this month .
Earlier this week , a severe rain storm struck the city of Tyler and surrounding areas .
About 3,000 residents were without power at one point as a result of downed power lines .
The city of Wichita Falls has seen a severely dry period , spanning well over three years .
One media source recently stated the city had experienced its harshest 41-month drought period since 1897 .
Notably , experts predict Texas 's population may nearly double over the next 45 years .
Saeb Erekat , head of the Palestinian Negotiation Group , delivered to the UN Security Council on Tuesday a letter from the Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas , urging the UN to tend to the issue of Palestinian administrative detainees in Israeli prisons who have gone on a hunger strike .
He further noted that a new Israeli bill , allowing to force feed hunger strikers , undermines international conventions .
The reportedly longest group hunger strike in Palestinian history is currently taking place .
It was initiated in April by 125 Palestinian prisoners detained in Israeli prisons , in a protest against Israel 's detention policy , which allows imprisonment without trial or conviction .
Since the beginning of the hunger strike , about 80 of them are being treated in hospitals , some facing severe health risks .
Some striking prisoners have told Egyptian paper Al-Masry Al-Youm they are determined and will not cease until they win or die a martyr 's death .
They have also told the paper they had sent letters to the Egyptian leadership , asking it to tend to their situation and put an end to administrative detentions .
With the ongoing hunger strike , an Israeli bill has been drafted , allowing force-feeding of hunger striking prisoners , and use of extra force if needed .
Arab Organization for Human Rights prisoners affairs committee manager Janan Abdu said , in communication with Al-Masry Al-Youm , `` After the success of individual hunger strikes by Khader Adnan , Hana Shalabi , and Samer al-Issawi and others , Israel is trying to apply a law on forced feeding , which is internationally forbidden and which violates international human rights and the Fourth Geneva Convention , to break the will of prisoners '' .
Whilst the United States has not requested Australian aid , Abbott expressed concern the situation could become a problem for Australia and the rest of the world .
Abbott 's position on this issue in Iraq has been met with criticism from different members of parliament .
Opposition leader Bill Shorten warned `` Australia always needs to weigh up the use of our highly professional and dedicated soldiers as to whether or not it is in the Australian National interest '' .
Greens leader Christine Milne said Australia should focus efforts on diplomatic solutions through nonviolent action and the United Nations to bring about long-term stability and reconciliation in Iraq .
However Peter Jennings , head of think tank the Australian Strategic Policy Institute , supported Australia 's offer of support , though acknowledging Australia could do little as a main player in this conflict .
Jennings also advised that providing intelligence via surveillance may be a way for Australia to help in a supporting role .
Japanese officials announced on Friday the country 's annual whaling expedition to the north-west Pacific Ocean has captured and killed 30 minke whales .
This comes after the International Court of Justice -LRB- ICJ -RRB- banned Japan from continuing its Antarctic scientific whale hunting programmes in March this year .
The Australian and New Zealand governments had brought the Antarctic whaling issue to the attention of the ICJ earlier this year .
The JARPA II whaling programme had been officially classified as scientific research , however when the programme had been investigated at the ICJ , the court decided there was n't enough science involved to justify it .
They ordered Japan to stop whaling in the Antarctic , but this ruling only mentioned JARPA II -- not the annual Pacific whaling hunts .
This has allowed whaling to continue in the north-west Pacific Ocean .
Even after the court had ordered the termination of JARPA II , sixty per cent of Japanese citizens still believed scientific whaling should go on , as measured in a poll conducted by the Asahi Shimbun newspaper in April 2014 .
The International Fund for Animal Welfare says up to 200 minke whales can be hunted during the North Pacific expedition .
Japan has maintained scientific whaling programmes intend to understand the global whale populations , with the research programmes aiming to prove the global whale population is sustainable , allowing commercial whale hunting to resume .
In field hockey at The Hague , Netherlands , Australia defeated the Netherlands to win the 2014 Men 's Hockey World Cup yesterday , and was defeated by the Netherlands in the 2014 Women 's Hockey World Cup on Saturday .
Never before have the same two countries played in both Hockey World Cup finals in a single year .
The story was very different in the women 's competition , where the Australian women 's team , known as the Hockeyroos , were the underdogs , having not made a final in the World Cup or the Olympic Games since 2006 .
Whereas , the Netherlands team had scored 21 goals in the tournament up to this point , while only conceding one , and had not been beaten by Australia since 1998 .
Netherlands captain Maartje Paumen scored the first goal of the match from a penalty stroke , giving the Netherlands team their seventh Hockey World Cup win .
Kim Lammers then made it 2 -- 0 .
Seven-time Formula One champion Michael Schumacher has awoken from a medically induced coma and left the hospital in Grenoble , France .
Schumacher was induced after suffering severe head trauma following a skiing accident in the French Alps , December last year .
Rehabilitation from head trauma of this level could take months or years to complete according to Neurosurgeon Tony Belli , who spoke to the BBC .
Japan banned possession of child pornography though a bill passed in the Upper House of Japanese Parliament yesterday .
The ban prohibits owning a real life image of child pornography depicting a child under the age of eighteen .
However , this does not include depictions of children in computer-generated or drawn forms , such as anime and manga .
Bill supporter Kiyohiko Toyama of the New Komeito Party , speaking to Reuters , said `` For too long , there was a poor understanding of children 's rights .
Ultimately , that 's why it 's taken so long -LSB- ... -RSB- By outlawing the possession of child pornography with the intent to satisfy sexual interest , we make it harder for people to trade in such material . ''
Some manga artists , publishers , and free-speech activists have objected to the censure of manga content , saying it encroaches on the right to free speech .
Some objectors cite Japanese government press controls during the lead-up to World War II .
A court in Xinyu , China , has sentenced three anti-corruption activists to prison for causing public disturbance .
Wei Zhongping and Liu Ping received a prison sentence of six-and-a-half years under charges of `` using evil religion to sabotage law enforcement '' and `` picking fights and provoking trouble '' .
A third activist Li Sihua was also convicted for the last charge .
The three activists , who were associated members of the New Citizen 's Movement , were arrested last year during an anti-corruption protest that urged government officials to reveal their earnings .
Zhou Ze , Li 's Lawyer , told the AFP that an opportunity to appeal the charges had been discarded as pointless as `` The ruling in an appeal is already decided . ''
`` The charges against these activists were preposterous from the very beginning , '' said William Nee , researcher for Amnesty International .
The accused stood trial at a high security court late last year where , according to the BBC , their lawyers were concerned about serious procedural problems .
`` The harsh sentences are just the latest moves in the politically motivated crackdown on the New Citizens Movement , '' Nee said later in an emailed statement .
Osborne says the individual cities in the north of England are strong , but `` collectively not strong enough '' .
`` We need an ambitious plan to make the cities and towns here in this northern belt radically more connected from east to west -- to create the equivalent of travelling around a single global city .
I want us to start thinking about whether to build a new high-speed rail connection east-west from Manchester to Leeds . ''
The shadow chancellor , Ed Balls , said : `` We said months ago that we need value for money for the taxpayer and to improve the existing plans to maximise the benefits for the whole country and strengthen the links between northern cities .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Nobody will believe the Tories can deliver the jobs , growth and investment we need for the north of England .
Regional growth divides have widened markedly since 2010 . ''
Three journalists from the Qatar-based Al-Jazeera television news network have been sentenced to seven years in jail by a court in Cairo today for spreading false news and helping the Muslim Brotherhood group which are now banned as terrorists .
The three journalists -- the Australian correspondent Peter Greste , Canadian-Egyptian journalist and Cairo bureau chief for Al-Jazeera Mohamed Fahmy , and Baher Mohamed , an Egyptian producer -- were convicted alongside others tried in absentia .
Al Antsey , the managing director for Al Jazeera English said of the judgment : `` Today three colleagues and friends were sentenced , and will continue behind bars for doing a brilliant job of being great journalists .
At no point during the long drawn out ` trial ' did the absurd allegations stand up to scrutiny .
There were many moments during the hearings where in any other court of law , the trial would be thrown out .
Around 30 diplomas out of 250 distributed contained the spelling error , `` itegrated '' .
The journalism program has a grading policy called the `` Medill F '' , where assignments that contain an error such as having a spelling error result in the assignment being failed .
Graduating student Kit Fox , according to the Chicago Tribune , said of the Medill F , `` When as a freshman you hear about it for the first time , it sounds extremely harsh .
Vladislav Vasin won the men 's 50 meter freestyle .
Igor Zhuravlev came in first in the men 's 100 meter backstroke .
Vitaly Obotin finished first in the men 's 400 meter medley .
Ekaterina Savchenko won gold in the women 's 200 meter butterfly .
Several records were broken on the day .
During a preliminary , Russian Obotin set a new European Deaf Swimming Championships record in the the 400 meter medley event , breaking German Bjorn Koch 's record set at the 2010 Dortmund , Germany hosted championship .
In the final , Obotin broke his European record with a time of 4:33.66 .
Vasin matched the European Championship Record in the men 's 50 meter freestyle final , with a time of 24.35 , equaling Greek George Dontas 's record set at the 2002 championships in Amsterdam , Netherlands .
Russian Ekaterina Savchenko set a European Championship Record in the women 's 200 meter butterfly , with a time of 2:27.90 , bettering her own European Championship Record set in Thessaloniki , Greece in 2006 .
The Russian team of Leonid Grishin , Stepan Klimenko , Miron Denisov and Vitaliy Obotin set a European Championship record in the men 's 4 x 200m freestyle , beating the record set at the 2010 Dortmund hosted championship .
The Belorussian team of Maryia Rudzko , Katsiaryna Eramtsova , Aksana Petrushenka and Anastasiya Filipchyk set a world record in the women 's 4 x 200m medley , beating the record set by Belarus in 2009 in Taipei .
After two full days of swimming , Russia led the competition 's overall medal count with 26 medals , 11 of which were gold .
With five days of competition complete as of last night , Japanese wheelchair basketball player Mari Amimoto leads in scoring at the Women 's World Wheelchair Basketball Championship taking place in Toronto , Canada .
The 4.5 point player Amimoto , who plays club basketball in Australia , led her team in scoring with 18 in their opener against Canada , which they lost 83 -- 53 .
In her third game in pool play , a 48 -- 62 loss to Great Britain , she again led her team in scoring with 25 points .
In her team 's only win in pool play , she scored 37 points against Brazil in a game they won 63 -- 52 .
In the final game of pool play , she scored 20 points , leading her team in scoring in their 82 -- 49 loss to Germany .
Amimoto matched up against British player Helen Freeman , another leading scorer in the tournament , in her game against Great Britain .
Freeman held back Amimoto 's game after Japan took a very an early lead 4 -- 2 .
On her personal blog , Amimoto thanked people for their continued support -LRB- -LRB- jp -RRB- -RRB- Japanese language : 最後も引き続き応援よろしくお願いします ！ and said she was excited to be playing in the ninth place match against Mexico , and it is a game she really wants to win .
Overall in the competition , 126 players have scored at least two total points .
Their second leading scorer is Katie Harnock , with 75 points so far .
Round robin play concluded yesterday , with France , Germany , China , the Netherlands , Australia , Canada , Great Britain and the United States all having qualified to play in quarter-final matches scheduled for tomorrow .
Japan was scheduled to play Mexico for ninth place , and Brazil was scheduled to play Peru for eleventh place .
This morning European time , the Belgium men 's national goalball team departed for Espoo , Finland for the 2014 IBSA Goalball World Championships .
The team is scheduled to play their opening game on the morning of June 30 against Brazil men 's national goalball team .
Goalball was created in 1946 , exclusively for people with a visual disability and designed to help with the rehabilitation of veterans returning from World War II .
Play in the Paralympics consists of two twelve-minute periods , with a three minute break between halves .
Players are blindfolded to ensure all are equally visually handicapped on-court , and the game can be stopped to ensure goggles are properly fitted .
Standing in front of a long goal , they throw the ball at the opposition team 's net who in turn try to block it by listening to the ball , which contains a bell , and using their bodies to prevent the ball from going in .
The audience is asked to remain silent during play .
Yesterday in Toronto , Canada at the 2014 Women 's World Wheelchair Basketball Championship , four teams qualified for the semi-final rounds .
The teams still in the running to win the competition are Germany , the Netherlands , Canada and the United States .
Germany qualified after defeating France 70 -- 25 .
Mareike Adermann from Germany was named the player of the match .
The Netherlands earned their spot after beating China 62 -- 52 .
Dutch player Inge Huitzing was named the player of the match .
Canada was the third team to reserve their spot in the semi-finals after beating Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team 63 -- 47 .
Cindy Ouellet of Canada was named the player of the match .
Only four players scored for Canada : Ouellet led with 20 points , Janet McLachlan and Katie Harnock both scored 17 , and Tracey Ferguson scored 9 points .
Sarah Strewart led the Australian team in scoring with 12 points .
Neither team made a three-point shot .
Australia gave Canada ten attempts to make free throws , with Canada capitalizing on this to score 7 points .
In contrast , Canada only gave the Australians one trip to the free throw line , with Amber Merritt scoring on the team 's only attempt .
The United States booked the last spot in the semi-finals after defeating Great Britain 53 -- 41 .
The United States ' Gail Gaeng was named the player of the match .
The team took an early 6 -- 0 lead .
While Helen Freeman and Louise Sugden were able to score for Great Britain , the first quarter ended 13 -- 8 in favor of the US .
Great Britain was able to get within three points early in the second quarter , but were never able to get closer to Team USA , despite managing again to pull within three points during the third period .
The United States pulled ahead early in the fourth period by 12 points .
Rebecca Murray and Gail Gaeng led the USA team in scoring with 15 points each .
In other matches played yesterday , Brazil won the eleventh place match after defeating Peru 88 -- 8 .
Japan finished in ninth place after beating Mexico 68 -- 40 .
In semifinal play , Canada is scheduled to play the Netherlands today , and the United States is to take on Germany .
France plays Great Britain , and China is to compete against Australia in consolidation match play .
Russian men swept the podium in the men 's 50m butterfly with Ilya Trishkin taking home gold and besting the previous European Championship Record with a time of 25.62 .
Fellow Russian Vitaliy Obotin finished first in the men 's 200m medley , setting a new European record in the process and beating out the next closest swimmer in today 's competition , Trishkin , by almost 5 seconds .
Eleonora Brykanova won a gold in the women 's 100m freestyle .
Martin Fomin finished first in the men 's 200m breaststroke , with a European Championship Record time of 2:24.27 .
Russian swimmers claimed half the total gold medals awarded on the day , and half the total of all medals awarded .
The remaining gold medals were distributed amongst four other countries .
Ukraine 's Anna Tovsta won gold in the women 's 800m freestyle .
Poland 's Artur Pioro finished first in the men 's 400m freestyle .
Great Britain 's Danielle Joyce captured gold in the women 's 200m backstroke with a world record time of 2:25.38 .
Belarus 's Aksana Petrushenka finished first in the women 's 100m breaststroke .
Overall , Ukraine climbed one place over Germany in the overall medal rankings , having won four total medals on Wednesday .
Germany fell to sixth place , having won only one silver medal on the day .
Swimmers from Greece , Latvia , Netherlands , Portugal , Republic of Macedonia , Spain and Turkey failed to win any medals .
Mattamy Athletic Centre , Toronto , Canada -- Germany defeated the United States and Canada defeated the Netherlands yesterday in the semifinals of the 2014 Women 's World Wheelchair Basketball Championship at the Mattamy Athletic Centre in Toronto , Canada .
Canada is now to meet Germany in the final this afternoon , immediately after the match between the United States and the Netherlands for the bronze medal .
It led at every change , but the Canadian team persevered , represented on the court for most of the match by Tracey Furguson , Janet McLachlan , Cindy Ouellet , Katie Harnock and Jamey Jewells .
In the final quarter , Canada pulled away .
Two three-point field goals from the Netherlands ' Inge Huitzing nearly leveled the score .
The Netherlands was able to pull ahead , but Team Canada managed to get a point in front when the siren sounded , for a final score of 74 -- 75 .
The second semifinal between Germany and the United States was an equally close affair , with the two sides neck and neck for most of the match , with the lead changing several times .
The crowd was small , but vocal , and Wikinews was told by the German media that some 2,000 viewers in Germany had stayed up late to watch the match live via the webcast .
Scores were tied at 46-all at three quarter time , but Germany 's Marina Mohnen , Gesche Schünemann and Mareike Adermann managed to build a six-point lead with less than four minutes to go , despite having no answer to the United States ' Rose Hollermann .
The United States tried repeatedly sending Schünemann , Annika Zeyen and Simone Kues to the free throw line , only to find their shooting to be very accurate .
When the siren sounded , Germany had won , 68 -- 58 .
Mattamy Athletic Centre , Toronto , Canada -- Canada has won the 2014 Women 's World Wheelchair Basketball Championship at the Mattamy Athletic Centre in Toronto , defeating Germany 54 -- 50 in the gold medal match yesterday afternoon .
The game was a close one , which was decided in an exciting finish involving a series of missed shots and turnovers by both sides .
The Netherlands won the bronze medal game , defeating the United States 74 -- 58 .
The score belied the closeness of the game .
The Netherlands only pulled ahead in the third quarter .
Attempts to gain extra time by sending the Netherlands to the free throw line in the closing minutes increased the margin to twenty points at one stage .
Caloundra almost scored a try in the first three minutes of the second half but the ball was lost forward by a Noosa player attempting to intercept a pass .
Noosa would seemingly shut out the game with a converted try .
But Caloundra hit back three minutes later with a try of their own .
In the round 's other game , Toads defeated Maroochydore 31 points to 24 .
Arundhati Bhattacharya , the chairperson of SBI , made the proposal at a Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion Council event held in Mumbai on Saturday .
She said the need for gold deposits to become more liquid has increased because gold import is putting a strain on the country 's current account deficit .
S. S. Mundra , Chairperson and managing director of BoB , agreed and said it would help bringing gold into the more productive sectors of the economy .
Bhattacharya added SBI has no longer any incentive to run its gold deposit scheme as it can not fully deploy the assets , noting SBI is the party most involved with gold deposits in India .
G. S. Sandhu , Union financial services secretary , also at the event , responded that the government is looking for ways to monetize the gold held by the public , as import of gold can strain the current account deficit and foreign exchange reserves .
Wikinews interviewed Tom Kyle , the coach of the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , in Toronto for the 2014 Women 's World Wheelchair Basketball Championship .
One of the guys at council said `` we 've got an old copy of DataEase .
Did n't like dBase IV , it had all these bugs in it , so my system started to crash .
So I 'd go home at night and write the program , and then come back and put it into the centre during the day so they could collect the statistics I wanted .
It was a simple point of sale system , but it was effective , and then we upgraded that to Clipper and I started programming object orientated while I was there , and wrote the whole booking system , we had bookings for the pools , learn-to-swim bookings , point of sale .
We actually connected it to an automatic turnstyle with the coin entry so it gave me a whole heap of new skills in IT that I never had before , self-taught , because I 'd never done any IT courses , when I went to Brisbane City Council and that did n't work out then I started my own computer company .
Tom Kyle : So that 's when I started my own company .
I had an ethical disagreement with my boss , who spent some council money going to a convention at one place and doing some private consultancy , which I did n't agree with Council funds being done like that , so I resigned .
It then allowed me then to become an entrepreneur of my own , so I wrote my own software , and started selling a leisure package which basically managed leisure centres around the country .
In 2003 my boys had finished at school and I 'd got a divorce at that stage .
Been offered another opportunity to go to Villanova College , which was a competing school across the other side of the river .
I 'd actually started working for various companies , and I ended up with Suncorp Metway as a project manager .
Got out of my own company and decided to earn more money as a consultant .
And then in 2000 I decided to give that away and went to work for Jupiters Casino .
She was left out a little bit because I 'd be with the guys for many many hours .
There was a number of junior Rollers coming through that group .
He really appreciated what I 'd done there , and when Craig Friday said that he was having a family and could n't commit to the next year in 2010 which was the world championship year , Ben asked me to join the program .
So in 2010 I attended my first official world championships with the Rollers , and we won .
One of my colleagues at work came to me and he said `` Tom , you coach wheelchair basketball ? ''
And he said , `` Well , my son 's in a wheelchair , and his team 's looking for a coach .
I left them on the bench , my wife Jane took a look at it and said , `` Hey !
They 're looking for a manager !
I 'm still not going to drop my Villanova commitments , I 'm going to keep that going .
It 's not about just playing the game , it 's about being better individuals , putting back into your community and treating people the right way , so we used to do a lot of team building and -LSB- ... -RSB- cause you 're getting young men at these schools , trying to get them to become young adults .
Turned up at the first training session and met Adrian King and Tige Simmonds , Rollers , Australian players ... I 'd actually heard of Adrian because we 'd had a young boy at Ashgrove called Sam Hodge .
I applied a couple of things the boys had n't actually seen , and as it turns out , I ended up coaching against the -LSB- Perth -RSB- Wheelcats in a competition round .
So about three or four weeks later I get a phone call from Ben and he said `` We 've got a camp coming up in February , would you like to come in ? ''
The two of us got on well .
And out of that camp they were getting the team prepared to go to Manchester .
So I was sitting at Suncorp Metway running a big CRM program at the time , because they had just merged with Promina Insurances , so they 'd just acquired all these companies like AAMI , Vero and all those companies , so we had all of these disparate companies and we were trying to get a single view of the customer , so I was running a major IT project to do that .
And I get a phone call from Ben on the Friday , and he said `` Look , Tom , we 're going to Varese in the May , and we 're going on to Manchester . ''
How these boys spoke of the impact on their lives .
And he said , `` Craig Friday , my assistant coach , ca n't make it .
Anyway , walked into work on Tuesday morning and the boss said ... and I said I just to put it on the table : I 'm going .
Tom Kyle : So that was an amazing experience to go on that tour and to see what a championship team looks like under the competition of that ilk .
By this stage , 2011 , I 'd given up all the Villanova stuff so I concentrated just on the wheelchair and my Queensland group .
And I started to build the Queensland junior program , which featured Tom O'Neill-Thorne , Jordon Bartley , Bailey Rowland , all of those sort of players .
So Basketball Australia decided that they needed a full-time coach , which was a big investment for them , and they thought this was the next step for the Gliders .
Because for me I enjoy doing whatever I 'm doing , and I love the program .
So then I had to discuss it with the wife because it meant initially that would want us to move to Sydney .
And I said , look , I 'd go for it on the condition that it did n't interfere with Jane 's opportunity to become the manager .
I said look , the bottom line is that if it 's going to jeopardize Jane 's chances of being the manager , I will opt out .
And I said , well that was one of the other reasons I did put in for it , because if you did n't get it I wanted to make sure someone who was passionate about the Gliders to get it .
Marion could n't go on a certain tour , to Manchester , so Jane filled in .
Because we 'd worked so well with the under-23s together as a unit .
So it turns out in June I got a phone call from Steve Nick at that stage and got offered the job with the Gliders .
And they talked to her about possibly becoming the manager of the Gliders moving forward if Marion ever wanted to retire .
So in the May when the job came up I looked at it and went , well , ca n't , it 's a conflict of interest , because if I put my name up , potentially Jane misses out on being the manager .
Being able to put things together when it really counts .
Got a good team bonding happening there .
Also I thought if Ben really wants me to go for it he would have asked me .
Five day experience with playing five games against the Japanese .
We 're a lot stronger than we ever have been , I think , mentally .
But we 're now starting to get to the real honesty phase , where we can tell each other what we need to tell each other to get the job done .
That 's the breakthrough we 've made in the last month .
Whereas in the past I think we 've been afraid to offend people with what we say .
Tom Kyle : I was born in Cooma , in the Snowy Mountains in New South Wales .
Grew up in the Snowy Mountains Scheme with my family .
At that stage my father worked for the Snowy scheme .
Tom Kyle : I played for Cooma .
So I 'm coming up to my forty years of coaching .
Tom Kyle : Still played cricket .
Went on to ... potentially I could have gone further but cricket became one of those sports where you spend all weekend , four afternoons a week ...
Tom Kyle : I went back and did Year 12 twice .
After two years there they merged the Institute of Education with the University of Wollongong .
Tom Kyle : Yes , I was given a job and a house .
The job basically entailed looking after their gymnasium and doing some part-time teaching as well as being the basketball convener and tennis convener .
So that got me well and truly involved in that .
And then in '85 was the birth of my first son , and with that came a bit of change of priorities , so then in 1986 I moved back to Sydney .
So I saw that as an opportunity to get out of , I suppose , the teaching side of things at that stage did n't appeal to me , the coaching side did , the teaching side and the fact that you had to follow the curriculums , and some of the things you were n't allowed to have fun , to me if you 're going to learn you 've got to have fun .
So I had both of those teams and I was coaching them , travelling around the north of the state , and competing .
We were fortunate enough we came second the year I was the head coach of the men in the state competition for our area .
That gave me a whole new perspective of coaching , because it was now senior men 's coaching as well as junior men 's .
We had people like Ian Davies coming out of the NBL at Sydney and trying out wanting to play with the men 's squad .
The Dalton boys came out of that program .
In that time we held the selection criteria for the 1988 Seoul Olympics swimming .
All the swimmers coming through .
All the swimmers going to Seoul .
In 1985 I took a team of fifteen boys from Churchie into the United States for a couple of summer camp tours which we do , and I got involved in the Brisbane Bullets team at that stage , getting them moved in to Churchie to train .
So moved back to Brisbane in 1989 , to take up a job as a marketing officer at the Department of Recreation at Brisbane City Council .
My sons were looking at becoming involved , they were going through St Peter Chanel School at The Gap , and that was a feeder school for Marist Brothers Ashgrove in Brisbane , which was a big Catholic boys ' school in Brisbane .
So I started to get involved in Marist Brothers Ashgrove basketball program , and I became the convener of basketball as well as the head coach there for about seven or eight years running their program , while my boys , obviously , were going through the school .
Looked after some things at the Brisbane Bullets ' home games .
Palestinian officials on Sunday said Egypt was opening the gates of the Rafah border crossing for a limited time and limited number of pilgrims from the Gaza Strip .
This , in order to allow them to perform pilgrimage to Mecca in Saudi Arabia .
Crossing the border into Egypt through Rafah crossing is the main route for Muslims in Gaza to fulfill the Islamic ritual , and officials said 800 of them were supposed to cross the border on Sunday .
About 15,000 other Palestinians from the Gaza Strip are waiting to cross to Egypt .
Some hold foreign passports , and about 4000 of them wish to leave Gaza to receive medical care .
Egypt has closed the border for long periods , thus increasing pressure on the population in the Gaza Strip .
Egyptian authorities claim Hamas has carried out terror attacks from Gaza to Egypt and meddled in Egypt 's internal affairs .
Hamas firmly denies these accusations .
The primary payload was an earth observation satellite from France called SPOT 7 which weighed 714 kg .
Other satellites included on board were the German AISat , 14 kg ; Canadian NLS7 .1 -LRB- CAN-X4 -RRB- and NLS7 .2 -LRB- CAN-X5 -RRB- , 15 kg each ; and Singaporean VELOX 1 , 7 kg .
The launch took place at 9:52 AM on Monday morning , delayed from the original schedule by three minutes to avoid space debris .
Along with the US , Russia , the European Union , China , and Japan , India is one of the few nations that offer commercial launch services .
ISRO 's next major launch may be this month using a GSLV-III launch vehicle .
In a statement Mr Narev said , `` Poor advice provided by some of our advisers between 2003 and 2012 caused financial loss and distress and I am truly sorry for that .
We have also invested in new systems , implemented new processes , enhanced adviser supervision and improved training . ''
Maroochydore fullback Lasaro Manomoli opened the scoring through a penalty goal .
Alex Millington opened University 's scoring with a penalty goal of his own .
Flanker John Southern scored the opening try of the game off a charge down .
Andrew Robilliard scored University 's second try on half time .
Millington converted both tries .
It was n't until thirty minutes into the second half before University scored again .
Darren Gibson scored in the right corner off a 30 metre run .
University centre Vern Parks finished off the bonus point win with a try in the opposite corner .
University are now scheduled to host Noosa next weekend in a match which should separate the teams at the top of the ladder .
Noosa defeated Toads 18 points to 13 in the weekend 's other A-grade game .
The budget emphasized increased amenities for travelers , better safety , and timely completion of projects .
There were no fare hikes announced as both passenger and freight fares had been increased last month .
But , it was announced that fares will be revised twice a year to absorb fuel costs .
Gowda criticized previous governments for announcing new projects and failing to complete them .
He said projects will now be prioritized , such as decongesting major routes instead of announcing new ones .
Gowda announced no major new projects , but announced 54 new trains .
He also criticized the last government for driving the railways into a loss .
Gowda announced a bullet train between Mumbai and Ahmedabad ; new semi-high speed trains in nine sectors connecting metros ; and new measures towards improving cleanliness , food , and e-ticketing were announced .
He said CCTVs will be installed in major stations to monitor cleanliness , and major stations will have food courts serving local cuisines and precooked food from reputable catering brands will be served on-board .
The railways have faced complaints of substandard food in the past .
The budget allocated a significant sum to the construction of bridges at unmanned crossings , a major cause of rail-track deaths .
He announced a new project to introduce automatic closing doors on mainline and suburban trains , and said wi-fi will be provided in larger stations and select trains .
The e-ticketing system will be extended from booking tickets to booking coaches and entire trains , and also retiring rooms in stations .
Electric mobility carts will be provided to elderly and handicapped passengers at all major stations .
Also , Railway Protection Force will recruit four thousand female constables and escorted carriages will be provided for women .
A significant amount was announced for improving rail connectivity in north-east India .
Gowda emphasized use of public-private partnerships -LRB- PPPs -RRB- to fund future projects .
He also said he will ask the Cabinet to approve foreign direct investment -LRB- FDI -RRB- in Indian Railways .
Manish R. Sharma , executive director of capital projects and infrastructure at PricewaterhouseCoopers , pointed out the budget did n't contain any information on how the government intends to attract private investors .
Deven Choksey , managing director at K. R. Choksey securities , said the government now seemed to be more inclined towards PPPs than before .
India 's stock index SENSEX dropped and closed 2 % below opening .
Investors were observed selling shares in energy , infrastructure , and real estate sectors .
On Tuesday a group of militants crossed the southern marine border between Israel and the Gaza Strip .
According to Hamas controlled television , the group were Hamas operatives who came ashore next to the Israeli town Zikim to attack the nearby Israeli military base located between the city Ashkelon and the Gaza Strip .
Israeli army spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Peter Lerner said after the incident , `` A number of terrorists came out of the ocean and attacked the base with Kalashnikov rifles and hand grenades '' .
Al-Qassam Brigades , Hamas ' Military wing , announced a force of naval commandos infiltrated Israeli borders and was `` conducting its duties in Zikim Zionist military base according to plan '' .
According to Hamas controlled television , the field commander in charge of the force reported Israeli casualties .
He went on to say the US government 's efforts are only addressing the outer effects of `` a much-larger problem .
And as we know with treating symptoms , the problems will continue until the root cause is resolved . ''
The governor also called on President Obama to `` make securing the border the top priority in resolving this crisis . ''
The governor suggests sending `` 1,000 National Guard troops to the Texas -- Mexico border to support operations until sufficient Border Patrol agents can be hired , trained and deployed . ''
The founder and president of The Minuteman Project , Jim Gilchrist , said his organization consisting of unarmed civilian militia are set to launch efforts to help patrol the US -- Mexico border in coming months .
He said his group is set to recruit over 3,000 people to assist in the effort .
He told FOX News , `` We are coming because we no longer trust that this government knows how to handle this issue '' .
On Thursday , Egypt opened the Rafah Border Crossing for a limited time to transfer only 11 wounded , out of dozens of Gaza residents injured during the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , which has intensified significantly lately .
The 11 wounded were to be sent for medical treatment in several hospitals , North Sinai 's Governor Abdel Fatah Harhor told MENA news agency .
On Friday , the crossing closed again , and then opened Saturday for food and medical supplies to be transported into Gaza .
Monday , pilgrims were allowed to cross into Egypt , so they will be able to travel to Mecca to fulfil Islamic traditions .
Mohamed Morsi during his tenure as President of Egypt strengthened the connection between Egypt and the Gaza Strip .
At the end of 2012 , his government aided the coordination between the two sides and advanced a peace .
Since the removal of president Morsi by the military and election of the current president , Abdel Fattah el-Sisi , the Egyptian army has destroyed tunnels that had been dug between Gaza and Sinai , through which resources had been smuggled .
Noosa has defeated University 24 points to 15 in their round 10 Sunshine Coast Rugby Union match at the University of the Sunshine Coast in Sippy Downs , Australia yesterday .
University opened the scoring at 14 minutes as winger Darren Gibson scored in the south east corner .
Noosa scored three minutes later , in the opposite corner , with Matthew George opening the Uni defence to put Jarrod Postle over .
Alex Millington put Uni ahead 8 -- 5 at the 20 minute mark through a penalty goal .
The lead was short lived , however , as Noosa scored another try .
This time it was David Harrold scoring 20 metres in from the corner .
Noosa 's third try came 19 minutes into the second half through captain Matthew George .
The try was converted by Harrold .
University scored a final try four minutes from full time with Millington converting .
The match finished up with Noosa winning 24 -- 15 .
In the other A-grade game , Toads drew 14-all with Caloundra .
In leaflets dropped by Israel this morning in northern Gaza Strip , civilians were told to leave `` for their own safety '' by 12:00 today , local time -LRB- 0900 UTC -RRB- .
The leaflets also said the planned Israeli military operation in the area would be brief .
As part of the attacks in the Gaza Strip , the Israeli military reported commando soldiers have destroyed a launching site in the northern part of the Strip early today .
An Israeli Military spokesperson said four soldiers were slightly injured in the operation .
This is the first ground operation the Israeli military conducted inside Gaza since the escalation began .
Yesterday , all fifteen members of the UN Security Council called on both sides to return to the understandings reached in the November 2012 ceasefire agreement .
Also yesterday , Israeli operations in Gaza expanded to include targeting Hamas-related civilian institutions .
The proposal `` was n't worth the ink it was written with '' , said a statement by Hamas 's military wing .
Talking to the AP news agency , Osama Hamdan , an aide to Hamas leader Mashaal , said Hamas has specific demands from Israel , including prisoner release .
Analysts quoted in nsnbc.me website claim Hamas has a divided agenda , making it even harder to get to a decision agreed by all .
The faction led by Mashaal is , reportedly , said to be influenced by agendas of other countries in the region , such as Qatar and Turkey , and not solely from the interests of the Palestinian nation .
Since the beginning of the escalations , Israel has been bombarding the Gaza Strip , emptying the accustomed busy Ramadan streets and markets .
Some blame Israel for the grim situation and publicly call to strike against it , others quietly blame Hamas .
A resident of Gaza , a driver in profession , identified only as Abu Ali for fear of Hamas ' retribution , said `` Everybody here hates Hamas , but they are too afraid to say so publicly '' .
The flight , which departed Amsterdam Airport Schiphol in The Netherlands at 10:15 UTC en route to Kuala Lumpur International Airport in Malaysia , disappeared from radar at 13:15 UTC near Hrabove , a village in the Donetsk Oblast of Ukraine .
283 passengers and 15 crew were aboard the aircraft , all 298 in total perished .
The area the plane was flying over is a conflict zone currently between Ukrainian forces and pro-Russian separatist forces .
United States officials confirmed the aircraft has been shot down , according to data from a surveillance satellite which showed the last trajectory and impact of the missile .
The missile is believed to be a Buk M1 surface-to-air missile which are believed to be in the hands of rebels according to reports from the area .
Ukrainian officials denied the missile which shot down the airliner belonged to Ukraine .
Pavlo Klimkin , Ukraine 's foreign minister , said to The Guardian , `` We are absolutely sure and we checked yesterday that no missiles have been taken from the Ukrainian army '' .
The Security Service of Ukraine -LRB- SBU -RRB- published on YouTube an alleged wiretap of separatist commanders and Russian intelligence officers discussing the shoot-down and acknowledging the aircraft shot down was civilian .
Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko said , `` This was not an ` incident ' , this was not a ` catastrophe ' , this was a terrorist act '' .
Malyasian prime minister Najib Razak , said , `` If it transpires that the flight was shot down , we insist that the perpetrators must swiftly be brought to justice . ''
Benicàssim , Spain -- Thursday , the 20th edition of the Festival Internacional de Benicàssim started , with a dedicated audience who sang and danced with the music of groups like James and Klaxons , two bands that used the festival to present new songs from their newest works .
Israel called an extra 18,000 reserve soliders on top of 50,000 others who had been called up during the last few days .
The Israeli military wrote on Twitter : `` We have hit Hamas hard , and we will continue to hit Hamas hard '' .
In remarks to CNN , Hamas spokesperson Fawzi Barhoum remarked on the Israeli ground movement , `` the beginning of the Israeli ground invasion of Gaza is a dangerous step with unknown consequences .
Israel will pay a heavy price for it '' .
During the ceasefire , banks that had been closed since the beginning of the escalation opened , the Red Cross helped repare water pipes and electric power lines , the citizens of the Gaza Strip came out to the streets , and trucks filled with basic products entered through Kerem Shalom border crossing into Gaza Strip .
Since the beginning of the ground maneuver , Israel has found at least ten tunnels leading to Israel , killed seventeen Palestinian armed militants , and captured another 21 .
Netanyahu said he has ordered military planning for a possible `` considerable expansion of the ground operation '' .
Hamas officially threatened they will `` drown the occupation army in Gaza mud '' .
In the capital city Peshawar of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in Pakistan , unidentified armed men targeted security guards at the Hayatabad Industrial Estate on Sunday .
At the time , two security guards were checking vehicles entering the estate , while others were praying .
Police said guard Akhtar Zaman died at the scene , while guard Imran Zaman was taken to Hayatabad Medical Complex and died shortly thereafter .
According to the police , the three perpetrators were riding motorcycles , and escaped .
Police cordoned off the area while collecting evidence .
Reportedly , attackers look for checkposts with incautious policemen .
Superintendent of Police Faisal Kamran said targeting of police is on the rise , especially during the Iftar .
The security guards may have been mistaken for policemen by the attackers .
Describing alertness measures , he said , `` One out of every three cops will be standing alert at some distance at a checkpost or police car '' .
The security guards were private employees of the estate sanctioned by the police department .
Hayatabad police station official Ihtisham explained the police department provided their uniforms .
According to Malik Niaz , president of Industrialists Association Peshawar , `` They belonged to a group of private guards who assist the police in safeguarding the industrial estate -LSB- ... -RSB- formed by industrialists about five years ago after an increase was reported in kidnapping cases from the estate in broad daylight '' .
On Sunday , in the deadliest day of fighting for the Israeli military in several years , thirteen Israeli soldiers were reported killed in the Gaza Strip .
Over 500 deaths of Palestinians have been reported in the Gaza Strip in the now-fourteen days of Israel 's offensive against Hamas .
Meanwhile , thirteen Israeli soldiers were killed Sunday , including two soldiers who were United States citizens .
Furthermore , the armed wing of Hamas claimed in a statement , `` We have captured a Zionist soldier and the occupation has not admitted that '' , and displaying a identification card and a serial number .
The IDF is investigating the claim .
A anonymous senior Israeli military source told The Guardian in regards to Hamas fighters , `` We have to admit we were facing good fighters , very well equipped with sophisticated weapons systems , accurate weapons , heavy weapons including mortars , booby traps . ''
All this occurred while a United Nations Security Council meeting was held in New York City at the request of Jordan .
Speaking to reporters after the meeting , Rwanda 's UN ambassador Eugene Gasana said , `` The members of the Security Council expressed serious concern about the growing number of casualties .
The members of the Security Council called for an immediate cessation of hostilities '' .
Gasana continued saying , `` The members of the Security Council called for respect of international humanitarian law including protection of civilians -LSB- ... -RSB- The members of the Security Council emphasized the need to improve the humanitarian situation , including through humanitarian pauses . ''
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , who is in Doha , Qatar meeting with Qatar 's Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas , said in a statement , `` As I travel the region , I will continue to press for an -LSB- immediate -RSB- ceasefire -- an immediate end to the Israeli military operation in Gaza and the rocket fire by Hamas and Islamic Jihad '' .
Ban criticized Israel for the civilian death toll saying , `` While I was en route to Doha , dozens more civilians , including children , have been killed in Israeli military strikes in the Shejaiyah neighborhood in Gaza -LSB- ... -RSB- I condemn this atrocious action .
Israel must exercise maximum restraint and do far more to protect civilians . ''
International pressure to end hostilities between Palestinian armed forces and the Israeli military in Gaza is mounting .
The conflict is intensifying after two weeks of fighting and several days of ground clashes .
Despite Israeli ground maneuvers in the Gaza Strip , Hamas is maintaining rocket fire towards Israel and simultaneously battling the Israeli forces on the ground .
Furthermore , Hamas is continuing its attempts to execute effective attacks against Israel , sending operatives through a tunnel into Israel on Sunday .
Ten operatives were located and eliminated by the Israeli military .
On the same day , a gory battle occurred in a Palestinian town Shaja'ia , dubbed a `` terror stronghold '' by Israel .
According to the BBC , at least 60 Palestinians were killed during the ongoing offensive on the town , the harshest offensive of the operation so far .
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon denounced the offensive and described it as `` an atrocious action '' .
The Palestinian side has seen over 500 deaths .
On the Israeli side two civilians died as a result of the rockets launched from Gaza , while 18 soldiers died during the clashes .
Palestinian news channels have shown damage to civilian infrastructure in Gaza .
The Israeli military claimed that armed militants were using the buildings to store and fire rockets towards Israel .
The UN has reported that 70 % of Palestinian dead were not armed .
Israel blames Hamas for the death of the innocent residents , since , according to Israel , Hamas tells residents to stay in their homes , in spite of Israel 's instructions to evacuate the area and save themselves .
Over 83 thousand Palestinians adhered to the instructions and found shelter in UN complexes .
In light of the ongoing clashes , American officials have addressed the escalation of the conflict and have called for a ceasefire .
The Whitehouse stated that President Barack Obama `` raised serious concern about the growing number of casualties , including increasing Palestinian civilian deaths in Gaza and the loss of Israeli soldiers . ''
An Israeli military spokesperson told AFP , protesters on Thursday threw rocks and Molotov cocktails , and rolled burning tires , at the Israeli security forces .
Israeli police spokesperson Micky Rosenfeld said in the Old City of Jerusalem a few policemen were injured and about 20 protesters arrested .
According to BBC , Palestinian leaders said we are in the midst of an `` uprising of freedom and independence ''
In the Gaza Strip , Israeli strikes continue , as well as rocket shootings from Gaza into Israel .
So far , about 1,000 Palestinians and 42 Israelis have been killed in the fighting .
The UN said over 118,000 Palestinians are using UN facilities for shelter throughout the Gaza Strip , while over forty percent of the Gaza Strip was under evacuation warning by the Israeli military .
Ground reporters say Israel struck a UN facility in Beit Hanoun on Thursday and there were casualties .
An Israeli Military spokesperson said there was no intention to attack that place , and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Hamas is accountable for any civilian casualty .
Hamas Leader Khaled Mashal from his exile in Qatar told the BBC , `` We do n't want to be controlled by a border crossing that makes Gaza the biggest prison in the world '' .
A rare tornado ranked EF2 on the Enhanced Fujita scale struck the city of Revere , Massachusetts around 9:30 am local time -LRB- 1330 UTC -RRB- on Monday , causing a swath of destruction over two miles -LRB- about three km -RRB- long and 3/8th of a mile -LRB- about 6/10 km -RRB- wide as winds topped around 120 mph -LRB- about 190 kph -RRB- .
The tornado began at the border of Revere and neighboring Chelsea , Massachusetts and traveled along the street of Broadway in Revere , according to the National Weather Service 's preliminary report .
Thirteen buildings are reported to be uninhabitable .
Partial building and roof collapses along with downed power lines and trees were reported through the city .
Cars were crushed by trees or flipped over .
Nevertheless , no serious injuries or deaths were reported in the densely populated city .
Revere mayor Dan Rizzo said , `` We were very , very fortunate to have no casualties and just some minor injuries from this monumental storm that took us all by surprise '' .
Rizzo added , `` Given the magnitude of the storm , it 's really a miracle that no one sustained more serious injuries '' .
Revere Police are urging people to avoid the city until further notice as clean up begins .
A shelter has been opened at the Rumney Marsh Academy school .
Researchers from Australia , Denmark , Germany , Norway , United Kingdom , and the United States conducted lead concentration measurements of sixteen ice core samples , and found that industrial air pollution has persisted Antarctica since its arrival there in 1889 and remains significant in the current century .
Their study was published in Scientific Reports on July 28 , and covered in Nevada 's Review journal this Saturday .
Lead was chosen to trace the industrial pollution of atmosphere because of its low natural concentrations in ecosystems , as well as unique ` fingerprints ' of different sources .
Analysis of such characteristic isotopic signatures traced Broken Hill , Australia as the pioneering source of lead pollution in Antarctica , and even today its contribution remains significant .
Coauthor Paul Vallelonga detailed , `` Lead is a toxic heavy metal with strong potential to harm ecosystems -LSB- ... -RSB- While concentrations measured in Antarctic ice cores are very low , the records show that atmospheric concentrations and deposition rates increased approximately six-fold in the late 1880s , coincident with the start of mining at Broken Hill in southern Australia and smelting at nearby Port Pirie '' .
Lead author Joe McConnell noted , in Review journal , `` A single industrial complex was enough to contaminate the entire continent of Antarctica thousands of kilometers away -LSB- ... -RSB- We 're still polluting Antarctica today '' .
McConnell said in getting the cores he traveled to Antarctica `` four or five '' times .
They were cut for storage in boxes , six three-foot sections per box weighing over 100 pounds -LRB- 450 kg -RRB- .
A single ice core can be used by researchers in many experiments during the next several years .
Concentrations of lead on the Antarctic continent have declined after the 1990s , but remain around three times higher than before industrialization , despite banning of leaded petrol and similar emissions regulations .
As McConnell said , `` Our measurements indicate that approximately 660 tonnes -LSB- 1.5 million pounds -RSB- of industrial lead have been deposited on the snow-covered surface of Antarctic during the past 130 years -LSB- ... -RSB- While recent contamination levels are lower , clearly detectable industrial contamination of the Antarctic continent persists today , so we still have a ways to go . ''
The violent conflict between the armed factions in Gaza and the Israeli military stepped up another level on Tuesday .
On a day when at least 100 Palestinians were reported killed , Hamas symbolic targets were hit , including reportedly the power plant in Gaza city , Hamas radio and television broadcasting stations , and the homes of Hamas leaders , while Hamas continues to attack through its tunnels and launch rockets at Israeli cities .
On that day , Al-Aqsa , Hamas ' radio and television broadcasting stations , were attacked .
The Israeli military claimed the stations were used by Hamas to convey its messages to the population in Gaza , including the denial of the Israeli military 's warnings to the people before bombings close to civilian homes .
Additionally on Tuesday , a main mosque in the city of Gaza was bombed , as well as several Hamas leaders ' homes in Gaza , including the house of Ismail Haniyeh , Hamas prominent leader in Gaza .
During the Israeli attack Tuesday morning , the power plant supplying most of the electricity to Gaza was badly damaged .
Most -- eight of ten -- of the power lines carrying electricity from Israel to the Strip have already been damaged in the conflict .
After the last time the power plant was attacked , a week ago , electricity supply to the residents of Gaza had dropped to only a few hours a day .
According to The Boston Globe , a spokesman for Gaza 's Electricity Distribution Company says the plant , which supplies electricity to most of the Gaza Strip , was attacked by an Israeli tank .
The Israeli military claimed to have bombed well over 100 terror targets on Tuesday .
Resistance organizations in the Gaza Strip continued to launch rockets aimed at the Tel Aviv area and other areas of Israel ; some of these rockets were intercepted by Israel 's Iron Dome system .
Researchers from Asia , Africa , Europe , and the United States have mapped resistance of malaria-causing parasite Plasmodium falciparum to antimalarial drug artemisinin , mainly in Southeast Asia ; correlated the resistance-causing mutation with slow parasite clearance ; and found that prolonged therapy is highly effective against drug-resistant malaria .
Their study was published in New England Journal of Medicine on Thursday .
The mutation considered in this study was identified last year as the molecular marker of artemisinin-resistant malaria .
The current study found the mutation , located in the propeller domain of a Kelch protein on human chromosome 13 , predicted when parasite clearance half-life would exceed five hours with 91.8 % sensitivity and 88.4 % specificity -- usually correct in predicting both when long half-life would occur , and when it would n't .
OpenClinica web-based database was used for collection of data which was used to assess parasite clearance rate .
The study found a six-day treatment course effective against artemisinin-resistant malaria .
The prolonged regimen which includes three days of artesunate followed by three days of dihydroartemisinin -- piperaquine , has shown 2 % rate of failure at day 42 in the same area .
Geometric mean of the half-life values were similar in two treatment groups of 60 patients each at each study site : one group received artesunate at a daily dose of 2 mg per patient 's body-weight kilogram and the other 4 mg per kilogram .
Afterwards , patients at several study sites were followed for 42 days -- Pailin , Cambodia ; Attapeu , Laos ; Binh Phuoc , Vietnam ; Shwe Kyin , Myanmar ; and Pingilikani , Kenya -- and for 28 days in Kinshasa , DR Congo .
Support for the study came from the UK Department for International Development , the Worldwide Antimalarial Resistance Network , the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes of Health , and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation .
Toads took the lead at 14 minutes through a penalty goal , extending it to 10 points with a converted try at half an hour .
Toads opened the scoring in the second half at three minutes with a converted try .
University looked like they hit back but were caught stomping in the ruck prior to scoring .
They guilty player was not identified by the officials .
A Royal Navy ship , HMS Enterprise , docked at Tripoli , Libya yesterday morning to help evacuate UK citizens from the country affected by increasing violence .
This follows the advice of the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office -LRB- FCO -RRB- for all UK citizens to leave the country by commercial means , and announcement the embassy in Tripoli would be suspending operations today .
The UK Goverment said the move was prompted by the increasing fighting in Tripoli and throughout the country , which started in the wake of the death of former Libyan leader Colonel Gaddafi in October 2011 but has worsened recently .
A new government led by Ali Zeidan was sworn in in November 2012 but instability has continued in the country , with Ali Zeidan himself kidnapped by militiamen for a time in October of last year .
The violence has increased in recent months after the government refused to disband itself at the end of its mandate in February .
The FCO stated spaces for assisted departure for Britons on HMS Enterprise is limited , and would be prioritised .
The Telegraph reports the British ambassador , Michael Aron , and essential personnel are to remain briefly to further assist Britons leaving the country , after the evacuation of non-essential staff on July 27 resulted in an attempted car-jacking , before being completed successfully .
Russia said the exercises would involve over 100 aircraft .
Western leaders have accused Russia of a military build-up adjacent to Ukraine .
Russia held military exercises in the area in March ; last week NATO General Philip Breedlove said Russia still has 12,000 troops adjacent to Ukraine , although Russia has claimed its forces have withdrawn from the area .
Russia has also been accused of arming rebels in the continuing fighting in Eastern Ukraine .
Russia also said the exercises were to include an array of fighters , bombers and helicopters , and told Interfax the purpose of the exercises is to improve air force cohesion .
This week 's exercises are to be followed by others with the same goal .
Meanwhile , fighting continued in Eastern Ukraine as government forces advance on the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk , the principal cities left in rebel hands .
These cities have both been reported to be surrounded , with civilians stockpiling resources in preparation for a siege amid worsening conditions .
The Telegraph reported groups of rebels arming themselves with a mixture of new and old weapons , while telling accounts of setbacks inflicted upon the Ukrainian army .
The fighting , ongoing since April , is reported to have increased in intensity since Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 was shot down last month .
The cause of the crash is still being investigated with experts from the Netherlands and Australia continuing to search the crash site .
At 8 o'clock yesterday morning , local time , a 72 hour ceasefire between the Israeli military and the armed factions in the Gaza Strip began .
The ceasefire was achieved due to the initiative and efforts of Egyptian mediators , who invited delegations from both sides to meet in Cairo and discuss the conditions for a long-term treaty .
A Palestinian delegation reportedly including representatives from Fatah , Hamas , and the Islamic Jihad , and an Israeli delegation , reportedly traveled to Cairo to discuss conditions for a long term ceasefire agreement .
Palestinian delegate Qais Abdul Karim , `` Abu Laila '' , said , `` Egyptian officials , headed by intelligence chief , showed understanding to our demands , but they said they play the role of mediator and will transfer these demands to the Israeli side . ''
Spokespersons on behalf of both sides told CNN the ceasefire must be respected .
Hamas spokesperson Osama Hamdan said : `` We hope they can take it and be committed to a cease-fire '' .
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Israeli wants `` quiet and security -LSB- for -RSB- the citizens of Israel '' .
Several prior ceasefire initiatives have been violated , with counter-accusations about which side dragged the other into fighting .
The UN gladly accepted the current Egyptian initiative and Ban Ki-moon , UN 's secretary general , called for talks to commence in Cairo as soon as possible .
The US White House has also expressed its support , and White House deputy national security advisor Tony Blinken said , quoted AFP , `` the aim of this initiative is to allow us to see if a ceasefire could be reached over a longer period of time '' .
United States Army Major General Harold J. Greene was killed yesterday afternoon in an apparent insider or ` green on blue ' attack at the Marshal Fahim National Defense University on the outskirts of Kabul , Afghanistan .
His death marks the first death of a United States general since the September 11th attacks and the first on foreign soil since the Vietnam War .
Along with the death of Major General Greene , fifteen others were wounded in the attack including a German brigadier general , eight US soldiers , a number of British soldiers , and three Afghan soldiers .
The attack started during a routine visit , when an individual , reportedly an Afghan National Army soldier , opened fire with a light assault rifle from inside a building , 100 yards -LRB- 90 meters -RRB- away from where Greene and others were standing .
Soldiers fired back and killed the attacker .
The Pentagon Press Secretary , US Navy Rear Admiral John Kirby , said , `` There are a number of casualties as a result of the shooting , perhaps up to 15 , to include some Americans '' .
Kirby added , `` Many were seriously wounded .
Others received only minor injuries .
An Afghan Defense Ministry spokesperson , General Mohammad Zahir Azimi , said the attacker was a `` terrorist dressed in an Afghan army uniform . ''
The Taliban acknowledged the attack and praised it , but did not claim responsibility for it .
Greene was serving as deputy commanding general of the Combined Security Transition Command -- Afghanistan at the time of his death .
Greene joined the Army as an officer in 1980 after graduating from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute .
In a statement Army Chief of Staff General Ray Odierno gave his condolences , saying , `` Our thoughts and prayers are with Maj. Gen. Harold J. Greene 's family , and the families of our soldiers who were injured today in the tragic events that took place in Afghanistan .
These soldiers were professionals , committed to the mission .
It is their service and sacrifice that define us as an Army . ''
Johnson stated he intends to also serve out his term as London mayor which ends in 2016 .
He did not announce which constituency he plans to seek election in , saying it was up to local Conservative parties to make that decision .
Johnson was formerly MP for Henley from 2001 to 2008 before he resigned in order to seek election as London 's mayor .
If elected , Johnson would be breaking a promise he made in 2012 in an interview with London 's Evening Standard newspaper : `` I made a solemn vow to Londoners to lead them out of recession , bring down crime and deliver the growth , investment and jobs that this city so desperately needs .
Keeping that promise can not be combined with any other political capacity '' .
Prime Minister David Cameron previously said Johnson was a `` great striker you want on the pitch '' .
Yesterday , David Cameron 's Twitter account followed up on this : `` Great news that Boris plans to stand at next year 's general election -- I 've always said I want my star players on the pitch '' .
Sadiq Khan , Labour 's shadow justice secretary , responded to the news by saying `` Boris Johnson 's announcement reveals how weak David Cameron is and how out of touch the Tories remain .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Today has also shown Londoners that , when they need a mayor prepared to address the big challenges facing their city , Boris Johnson 's priority is succeeding David Cameron rather than serving their interests . ''
Conservative MP and former chief whip Andrew Mitchell welcomed Johnson 's announcement : `` I think he 's a remarkable politician .
On Tuesday , the Australian Cabinet approved the `` Counter Terrorism Foreign Fighters Bill '' which is to be introduced into the Australian Parliament between August 26 and September 4 .
The bill follows after the `` National Security Legislation Amendment Bill '' which was introduced into the Parliament on July 16 and is now before the Australian Senate .
Attorney-General George Brandis mentioned at a joint press conference in Canberra on Tuesday , he has `` been asked to develop -- in consultation with relevant stakeholders , in particular , in the telecommunications sector -- a system of mandatory data retention .
That legislation has been approved in principle and is in development from today and is to be introduced into Parliament later in the year '' .
As Tony Abbott mentioned , `` the Government 's proposals to change 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act -LSB- ... -RSB- are now off the table '' .
The proposed legislation would change the `` Commonwealth Crimes Act '' , to include provisions currently found in the separate `` Crimes -LRB- Foreign Incursions and Recruitment -RRB- Act '' .
An important provisions of the proposed laws would make traveling to places with active terrorism an offence , as defined by the Minister for Foreign Affairs .
With stated intention of `` preserving national unity '' , Tony Abbott cancelled controversial changes to section 18C of the discrimination act which George Brandis had promoted .
`` There 's no question that Australia needs to be vigilant against terrorism but we must insist on ways to protect Australians from terrorism without overturning the fundamentals of our justice system '' , said Greens Senator Penny Wright .
`` Clearly we would need to see the detail of any legislation but as it 's been described so far , it seems that this legislation could see Red Cross and other humanitarian workers in declared zones having to face court to prove they 're not terrorists .
This law could also see Australian journalists reporting from countries like Syria or Iraq presumed guilty of terrorism . ''
Penny Wright also warned against removing the legislation 's sunset clause .
`` The Australian Greens would be very concerned about any legislation that further restricts civil liberties and removes scrutiny and oversight .
There 's a very important balance to strike between security and freedoms , and we would not want to see very legitimate security concerns be used to permanently erode human rights . ''
A research team from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology -LRB- MIT -RRB- and Harvard University 's Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering has developed a robot that assembles itself within four minutes from a flat sheet into a 3D -LRB- three-dimensional -RRB- moving structure .
Unlike previous self-folding machines , the robot can function autonomously .
Science published the study this Friday .
As described by MIT researchers , the initially flat sheet consists of five layers : copper wires in the middle , then two layers of paper -LRB- above and below -RRB- , and two outer layers of shape memory polymer .
The embedded heating circuits activate the robot 's self-folding by heating shape memory polymers at the hinges .
The parameters defining the fold pattern which determines the final 3D shape are placement of the self-folding hinges , and the order of their triggering .
Felton told about creation of the pattern : `` Cyclic folds are used by a software program called ` Origamizer ' as building blocks to create any polyhedron .
Once the battery is attached to the design , the robot folds itself into the pre-determined shape and walks away , with motion of the four-legged robot controlled by the included microprocessor and two small motors synchronised by it .
Each of the four legs has eight `` linkages '' which convert the force applied by a motor into motion .
The robot moved during testing at about 5.4 centimeters per second , over a pre-determined route , not just a straight line -- without any outside assistance .
Marc Lavine , a senior Science editor , suggested such robots might be put in place `` through a confined passageway , such as a collapsed building , after which they would assemble into their final form autonomously '' .
United States President Barack Obama appeared in the State Dining Room at the White House Thursday night saying he was authorizing two operations in Iraq against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant -LRB- ISIL -RRB- insurgency .
They were launched to help religious minorities who are trapped on a mountain without food and water that are `` facing almost certain death , '' according to Obama .
The first operation is targeted airstrikes against ISIL , and the second operation is to provide humanitarian aid to those trapped on the mountain .
Regarding the airstrikes Obama said , `` We intend to stay vigilant , and take action if these terrorist forces threaten our personnel or facilities anywhere in Iraq , including our consulate in Erbil and our embassy in Baghdad . ''
He added , `` We 're also providing urgent assistance to Iraqi government and Kurdish forces so they can more effectively wage the fight against ISIL . ''
In regards to the humanitarian aid operation , which had already started before Obama made the announcement , he said , `` Second , at the request of the Iraqi government -- we 've begun operations to help save Iraqi civilians stranded on the mountain . ''
He continued saying , `` Already , American aircraft have begun conducting humanitarian airdrops of food and water to help these desperate men , women and children survive . ''
According to a statement sent out by Rear Admiral John Kirby , the Pentagon 's press secretary , `` Two F/A -18 aircraft dropped 500-pound laser-guided bombs on a mobile artillery piece near Erbil .
ISIL was using this artillery to shell Kurdish forces defending Erbil where U.S. personnel are located , '' early Friday morning .
Toads ended Maroochydore 's chances of making the 2014 Sunshine Coast Rugby Union finals in Cotton Tree , Australia this afternoon .
A Maroochydore try at 32 minutes suggested a fight back from three tries down but Toads would pile on four tries to one from there .
Maroochydore 's finals chances ended at eleven minutes to five local time -LRB- 0649 UTC -RRB- with their final try .
To qualify for the finals , Maroochydore needed to win both of its games and have other results go its way .
Toads play Noosa next week and , in a minor semi final preview , Caloundra the week after .
Yesterday , Nigeria 's military engaged in gun battles with Islamic extremist group Boko Haram , aimed at regaining two towns in northeastern Nigeria recently captured by the group .
This comes as suspected members of Boko Haram attacked a village inside Cameroon .
On Wednesday , Boko Haram attacked and occupied the town of Gwoza , with over 50 reported killed as they forced Nigerian forces out of the town , a stronghold in the fight against the militants .
This followed the capture of Damboa in July , leaving much of Borno State under the control of the militants .
An attack on a remote northern Cameroon village in by suspected Boko Haram militants was also reported on Wednesday .
The attack left ten people , including one soldier , dead , as the group reportedly killed those they had captured during a confrontation with Cameroonian soldiers as they headed towards the Nigerian border .
This follows the kidnapping of several people including the Cameroonian deputy prime minister 's wife by militants ; Boko Haram is reportedly looking to extend its influence outside of Nigeria , including recruiting Cameroonians to their cause .
In response to the threat , the Cameroonian government has sent more than 1000 soldiers to the border region .
Director-General of WHO Dr Margaret Chan appealed for an international response to the outbreak , calling it `` the largest , most severe and most complex outbreak in the nearly four-decade history of this disease '' .
Reports say the comparatively underdeveloped medical infrastructure in the affected countries has hampered efforts to contain the spread of the virus , with Liberia 's health system particularly under-equipped for the pressure .
Medecins sans Frontieres -LRB- MSF -RRB- said the health system in Liberia was `` falling apart '' .
Health experts and aid workers from Europe and America are already working to help bring the outbreak under control , but MSF and WHO are now calling for more help .
The announcement by WHO has international law implications , and it is expected possible cases will not be allowed to leave the countries affected until it is confirmed they are clear of the virus , with the possibility of travel being denied from any region not meeting the WHO 's guidelines .
WHO have also warned all nations should prepare to bring their own nationals back to home territory for treatment if infected by the virus , with cases already returned for treatment to the US and Spain .
Meanwhile , restrictions put in place to limit the spread of the disease are reported to be causing problems among those affected in already impoverished areas .
Liberia and Sierra Leone are both reported to have deployed soldiers to limit travel within these countries , with many residents reported to be worried about the effect on their trade and incomes .
The Telegraph reported from interviews , there is also resistance to some measures in Liberia , where there is a strong stigma attached to the disease .
This has led to many people refusing to report the deaths of family members and hand their bodies over for cremation .
There have also been cases of violence towards those seeking to enforce government measures to limit the disease 's spread .
A research team from the Australian National University have generated complex surface flows driven by three-dimensional waves .
Their results show possibility of remote manipulation of floating objects and were published in Nature Physics this Sunday .
Professor Michael Shats spoke about the experiments : `` First I thought it was impossible and I thought that it was the effect of the boundaries nearby .
As Dr Horst Punzmann noted , `` The ability to move films on the ocean , like oil films ... would be an opportunity '' .
Professor Michael Shats explained that `` The power requirements for the wave maker are relatively small because we generate only the motion in the top layer '' .
To visualise the three-dimensional flows and trajectories , Houdini animation software was used and help was provided to the researchers by National Computational Infrastructure .
To create a figure of 2D unstationary flow , finite-time Lyapunov exponent analysis was used .
Prime Minister Modi was addressing Indian army and air force personnel where he said Pakistan not longer possessed the strength for a conventional war , and relied on proxy war .
Modi said his government means to achieve Indian defense manufacturing self-reliance .
After his election victory in May , Modi invited Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to his swearing-in ceremony , surprising various international observers and commentators .
However , since this meet between the two heads of the state more than 20 ceasefire violations have occurred across the borders ; India and Pakistan reached an agreement in 2003 on ceasefire at the line of control between Pakistan-controlled and India-controlled Jammu and Kashmir .
Pakistan blames Indian troops for committing human rights abuses against followers of Islam in Jammu and Kashmir , whom it claims to support only politically .
India rejects the accusation , and calls for Pakistan to prosecute militants based there for the 2008 Mumbai attacks , which killed over 150 people .
This limit was reached on Tuesday , reported to have been triggered by Verizon publishing another 15,000 paths .
Those affected included eBay , LastPass , and clients of the web hosting company Liquid Web , who lost much of their services until Verizon withdrew some of these new paths .
Problems nevertheless continued throughout the day , even after the withdrawal .
A longer term fix is possible , but it would require manually replacing old routers with newer , more capable ones .
It is hard to tell what issues would temporarily cascade though the internet by taking down routers from part of the internet for maintenance .
Many experts have warned that problems could continue until these difficult fixes have been implemented , although the recent switch to a newer form of IP Addresses , IPv6 , will temporarily help the issue .
Wired News reported that Andre Toonk , a network engineer , had stated that the number of network outages on the internet , typically around 1,500 , yesterday peaked at 2,587 , enough to become clearly noticeable .
A team of researchers from the University of Tennessee , Knoxville , has confirmed that near-Earth asteroid -LRB- 29075 -RRB- 1950 DA is primarily held together by van der Waals forces rather than gravity .
Cohesive forces prevent large scale shedding of material and breakup of the asteroid .
Their study was published Wednesday in Nature .
The researchers found that the bulk density 1.7 ± 0.7 g/cm ³ of the asteroid is approximately two times lower than the value required for self-gravity to balance out the centrifugal forces caused by rotation .
As Ben Rozitis , a planetary scientist and a co-author of the study , told Space.com : `` I was expecting to find a high-density metallic asteroid , as such an asteroid would n't require cohesive forces to hold itself together under its fast rotation .
-LSB- ... -RSB- We knew from previous work that this asteroid was rotating faster than it should be , and we wanted to know why '' .
Spectral observations of 1950DA indicated that it is either an E - or M-type asteroid in the Tholen classification .
Researchers have used for 1950DA the same meteorite analogue which was earlier found to fit best 21 Lutetia : enstatite chondrite with grain density of 3.55 g/cm ³ .
It allowed to calculate macro-porosity of 51 ± 19 % , indicating that 1950DA is a rubble-pile asteroid .
Taking into account thermal-infrared measurements of thermal inertia , presence of a fine-grained regolith is implied , primarily around 1950DA 's equator .
Negative ambient gravity near the equator of the asteroid -LRB- 48 ± 24 % of its surface -RRB- requires existence of cohesive forces to prevent loss of material .
This is similar to an effect noticed between the fine grains of regolith on the Moon .
Lunar regolith was found to be highly cohesive because of van der Waals forces between grains by the Apollo 17 expedition in 1974 .
It 's exciting because we 've provided the first evidence that cohesive forces are important for small asteroids , which had only been predicted up until now . ''
The balance between cohesion and negative gravity requires small grain sizes consistent with the grain size distribution on 1950DA , and similar to that of another rubble-pile asteroid , -LRB- 25143 -RRB- Itokawa .
Unlike Itokawa , 1950DA does not have large boulders on the surface ; they may have been lost as 1950DA 's rotation accelerated due to YORP effect .
This effect results in a change of the rotation rate of an asteroid -LRB- either faster or slower -RRB- , and is caused when the Sun heats up an object unevenly , due to asymmetric surface topography .
As the heat escapes , the rotation rate is slowly changed due to an uneven rate of cooling .
The researchers find that a rubble-pile asteroid may have a high rotation rate , if it is held together by cohesive forces between the grains .
But as the spin rate increases due to YORP effect , the centrifugal force may cause the rubble pile to eventually separate as it happened with P/2013 R3 .
A very small impulse may break one potentially hazardous object into several pieces .
An alternative is to use a ` gravity tractor , ' or a heavy spacecraft placed near the asteroid , which uses the force of gravity to pull the asteroid off course '' .
Bong Wie , an aerospace engineer at Iowa State University in Ames , noted : `` I just hope that an asteroid on a collision course with Earth will not be spinning rapidly and it will not be a rubble-pile asteroid '' .
Ben Rozitis clarified : `` Mining missions intend to visit small asteroids about 10 meters -LRB- 33 feet -RRB- or less in size , as it is thought that they are predominantly solid bodies .
However , cohesive forces enable such small asteroids to be rubble piles instead .
A small rubble-pile asteroid would be harder to interact with and collect , as it can easily deform or break up when subject to external forces . ''
CNN reported over a hundred captives had been abducted during a Boko Haram attack on a village by Lake Chad on the night of Sunday to Monday last week .
Captives were forced onto buses , before the convoy was stopped by the Chadian military as it was trying to cross the border , where the large number of people aroused suspicion .
Other captives were transported away by speedboat and were not rescued .
Founded as a political movement in 2002 , Boko Haram seek to create an Islamic country in Northern Nigeria , where the Nigerian military have been engaged in operations aimed at removing the extremists since 2009 .
In this time , thousands of people have been killed in the fighting , and hundreds are reported to have been kidnapped in both Nigeria and across the border in Cameroon .
Many of those kidnapped are believed by authorities to be either forced to fight for Boko Haram , or used as sex slaves .
The violence in the region has intensified this year , with Amnesty International saying over 4,000 people have been killed since January , compared to the 3,600 estimated casualties in the four years previously .
The Peshmerga were supported this weekend by US airstrikes in their attempt to push back the Sunni insurgents , and Kurdish officials reported `` good progress '' in the face of `` fierce resistance '' .
Reuters reported eyewitness accounts of Kurdish forces successfully retaking Batmaiya and Telasqaf , mostly Christian towns as close to Mosul -- about 18 miles -LRB- 30 km -RRB- -- as they have come since June when government forces were forced out .
The advance of the Islamic State has prompted responses from many parts of the international community .
On Friday the UN Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution targeting the extremist group 's finances and leaders .
Six individuals were named and now face travel bans , asset freezes , and arms embargoes .
The resolution also warned of the possibility of other sanctions against anyone found to be trading with the Islamic State , in a move aimed at stopping their supply of weapons and economic gain from sale of oil being produced by the oil fields under their control .
On the same day as the Security Council 's resolution , foreign ministers of the European Union 's member states issued a joint statement welcoming the efforts of those European states supporting Kurdish forces .
This support includes the supply of military supplies from France , and humanitarian aid from the UK , with Eastern European countries providing military materials also being transported by the UK .
Germany and the Netherlands were also reportedly considering the possibility of supplying aid where needed .
Rudaw reported from within Kurdistan that the local political parties have put aside their differences and are recruiting volunteers to send to the front .
Many of these parties can trace their beginnings back to the 1960s -- 1990s struggle against the Iraqi army , many of whom continue to maintain militias which are now being deployed to reinforce the Kurdish army in the region .
These are reported to have been joined by groups of ethnic Kurds from Iran .
Researchers from Australia 's University of New South Wales -LRB- UNSW -RRB- and the United Kingdom 's University of York and University of Aberdeen have measured face matching aptitude of 49 Australian passport-issuing officers and compared it against a control group of 38 students from UNSW .
In the test given to both groups , both had a roughly 20 % error rate .
The study `` Passport Officers ' Errors in Face Matching '' was published in PLOS ONE this Monday .
Match accuracy tested lower with official identification photos than with two-year-old photos taken by researchers ; average error was 29.1 % , with volunteers especially inaccurate on the official identification matches .
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has stated passport photo specifications comply fully with International Civil Aviation Organization -LRB- ICAO -RRB- standards .
As coauthor Professor Mike Burton of the University of Aberdeen says : `` There is a great emphasis on a passport image to fit all purposes but people often comment on the fact that their passport photo looks nothing like them -LSB- ... -RSB- It seems strange that we expect a single passport shot to encompass a person and allow us to consistently recognise them .
Could there in fact be an argument for our passports to contain a multitude of images , taken at different angles , in different lighting and formats ? ''
Previous psychological research has shown difficulty of deciding if two photographs are of the same stranger or of two different unfamiliar people .
As coauthoring psychologist Dr David White says , `` Despite this , photo-ID is still widely used in security settings .
Whenever we cross a border , apply for a passport or access secure premises , our appearance is checked against a photograph '' .
In the person-to-photo test , 30 officers -- with mean age 48.0 , 21 of them female -- in Sydney Passport Office , during a normal working day , had to compare photograph -LRB- presented for up to ten seconds -RRB- to the person present .
The person-to-photo test could not be given to a control group because it was not possible to bring back the ` applicants ' to repeat the test .
The ` applicant ' did not know whether the ID they presented was genuine or ` fraudulent ' , to avoid giving any cues to the passport officers .
The passport offers rejected 6 % of the genuine photos and accepted 14 % of the ` fraudulent ' ones , for 10 % wrong decisions overall .
As coauthor Rob Jenkins , a psychologist at the University of York , said : `` This level of human error in Australian passport office staff really is quite striking , and it would be reasonable to expect a similar level of performance at UK passport control .
-LSB- ... -RSB- At Heathrow Airport alone , millions of people attempt to enter the UK every year .
At this scale , an error rate of 15 per cent would correspond to the admittance of several thousand travellers bearing fake passports '' .
The face matching accuracy was found to be independent of experience and training .
As Dr David White says , `` passport officers did not perform better , despite their experience and training .
Two years later , the photo-to-photo test was conducted , with images supplied by 21 ` applicants ' from the person-to-photo test .
27 passport officers -- mean age 45.5 , 10 of them participants from the person-to-photo test , 22 of them female -- as well as 38 volunteers -- mean age 18.9 , 26 of them female -- compared photos taken recently to photos either from two years earlier or from official identification documents .
All variations on the trials taken together produced 84 trials , ordered randomly .
The testing was again done at the Sydney Passport Office , without time restriction , to encourage accurate response .
A possible solution of the problem is recruitment of staff with high face-matching accuracy , as Dr David White notes : `` But we observed very large individual differences .
This suggests security could be significantly improved by using aptitude tests to select staff for jobs involving photo-ID checks .
Because of this study , the Australian Passport Office now sets face-matching tests when recruiting staff and when selecting facial comparison experts '' .
On Tuesday President Hamid Karzai called for an end of a two month election dispute that has seen the two candidates , Abdullah Abdullah and Ashraf Ghani , both claim to have won the election .
Each of these votes is now being individually checked in a process involving international observers in a full audit of the ballot papers .
This process started in mid-July , with a target late this month for completion , allowing time for the new president to attend security talks with NATO .
A spokesman for President Karzai indicated , according to Reuters , the political stalemate has had a detrimental effect on the security situation in the country , with a corresponding increase in Taliban activity .
NATO forces are expected to leave the country , subject to the security talks , and outgoing President Karzai has declined to sign a security deal with the United States which would keep a small number of US troops in the country until 2016 , leaving the Afghan forces without support in their struggle against the Taliban .
The spokesman said the Taliban were acting more as a battalion , citing foreign reinforcements as the source of their apparent new-found strength .
The militants are reported to be attempting to take and hold ground , targeting key areas to secure opium export , the source of much of the insurgency 's funding .
Recent examples of the Taliban 's new tactics include an attack from a group of 700 Taliban , in Logar Province near the capital , Kabul , the governor of the province told Reuters .
An Afghan general , quoted by Reuters , said , `` Airpower by the foreign troops is the key component to this battle and we have lost many men simply because we could n't ask our foreign partners for air strikes '' .
In the past similar group attacks have been fended off with the support of air power provided by the International Security Assistance Force , with minimal casualties to Afghan security forces .
Russian authorities have detained four people on Wednesday on suspicion of vandalism , following an incident where the spire of the iconic Kotelnicheskaya Embankment Building in Moscow was painted in the colors of the Ukrainian flag .
The suspects , reportedly consisting of two men and two women , allegedly ascended the building by stairs to reach its top floor , before using climbing equipment to complete the ascent , according to Moscow police .
Over the course of the previous night , the suspects proceeded to paint the top half of the building 's star-shaped spire blue and erected a Ukrainian flag atop at about 7:15 am local time , reports the Interfax news agency , with information corroborated by Moscow 's municipal emergency services .
The alterations to the building made by the suspects remained for several hours , before workers removed the flag and repainted the spire to its normal color .
Containing 32 floors and standing at a height of 176 m -LRB- 577 ft -RRB- , the Kotelnicheskaya Embankment Building is one of the Seven Sisters , skyscrapers constructed between 1947 and 1953 in Moscow under the direction of Joseph Stalin .
Following the act , at least one of the suspects then reportedly descended from the building by parachute , reported state news channel Rossiya 24 , and captured on a video published by Lifenews , reportedly filmed by a local resident .
Additional video broadcast by Rossiya 24 , taken from a window , captured a parachuting suspect landing in a nearby playground .
Among the suspects was Alexander Pogrebov , who has denied the charges brought forth by authorities .
-LSB- ... -RSB- It just so happened that at the time of the jump , someone else committed an act of vandalism -- they destroyed the spire with paint , and raised the Ukrainian flag . ''
said Pogrebov in an interview to LifeNews .
Pogrebov 's comments were supported by a police official , who stated to the Itar-Tass agency : `` The two young men and two girls say they jumped from a high building with parachutes .
If convicted of vandalism , Pogrebov and the other suspects may be sentenced to a maximum of three years imprisonment .
Over the phone to Bloomberg , an unidentified duty press official stated the suspects were previously arrested over other charges .
According to reports from Russian state television , all four suspects were Russian citizens .
Other acts by Russian protestors to show support and solidarity with Ukraine , contrasting the approval which came following the Russian annexation of Crimea , included the singing of the Ukrainian national anthem by protestors while being arrested .
Russian musician Andrey Makarevich , who fronts the band Mashina Vremeni , which translates to `` Time Machine '' , was labelled as a `` traitor '' by Russian lawmakers and musicians who supported Russian interests , after he traveled to eastern Ukraine last week to perform for displaced children in regions held by the Ukrainian army .
The act comes just days prior to Ukraine 's Day of the National Flag on August 23 and Independence Day on August 24 .
The country 's president , Petro Poroshenko , expressed his approval from Kiev of the act and praise for the suspects in a written post on Facebook .
`` On the eve of Independence Day we are starting an initiative called ` Our Colours , ' which is devoted to the Ukrainian flag '' -LRB- -LRB- uk -RRB- -RRB- Ukrainian language : Напередодні Дня Незалежності ми починаємо ініціативу '' Наші Кольори '' , яка присвячена українському прапору , wrote Poroshenko .
`` And it is symbolic that , on this day , our colours have been painted on what is perhaps the greatest skyscraper in Moscow .
I urge Ukrainians throughout the world , wherever they are , on the eve of the anniversary of our independence , to decorate their homes , offices , and cars in our national colours . ''
`` I like very much the fact that , on the eve of celebrating the Ukrainian flag , one of Moscow 's highest buildings was painted in our colors , '' Poroshenko said in a video posted on Facebook .
Following the deaths of more than 2,000 people and the displacement of 300,000 from their homes amid fighting in eastern Ukraine between the Ukrainian armed forced and pro-Russian separatists , Poroshenko is scheduled to discuss the crisis with Putin next week , the first such meeting in two months .
SpaceX 's F9R test vehicle self-destructed yesterday during a test flight at their McGregor , Texas test facility .
According to a statement issued by SpaceX , `` Throughout the test and subsequent flight termination , the vehicle remained in the designated flight area .
John Taylor , a SpaceX spokesman , said that '' -LSB- d -RSB- uring the flight , an anomaly was detected in the vehicle and the flight termination system automatically terminated the mission . ''
SpaceX has said that more information will be forthcoming once they 've analyzed the flight data .
Operation Dawn is comprised of fighters , mostly from Misrata , who have been fighting a militia group from Zintan .
The two groups , former allies during the 2011 Libyan Civil War , have battled this year over parts of Tripoli , with fighting reportedly centered around the airport for several weeks now .
Yesterday 's attack follows a similar one reported to have occurred on the night of August 17 -- 18 , arousing speculation as to the origin of the planes .
Countries including Egypt , France , and the United States have denied any involvement in either attack , with the Libyan Government opening an investigation into the source .
After the attack on Monday , a spokesman for the militia group said they were not abandoning their positions and that militia fighters from other areas were joining their forces from Mosrata .
A political adviser of General Haftar 's forces , speaking to Sky News , said , `` Escalation by the militias in Tripoli will be met with escalation from our side until we restore security and stability to the country '' .
General Haftar threw his weight behind the forces from Zintan in May , with the central Government losing control of much of the country , now working from Tobruk away from the fighting .
With no national army , they are forced to rely on militia groups , who , while paid by the state , and wearing uniforms , are reported by Reuters to answer to their own commanders and towns .
Yesterday , the US 's Obama administration said it has ordered an investigation into the appropriateness of military hardware being sold to and deployed by police forces in the United States .
This investigation comes after the killing of Michael Brown , an unarmed black teenager shot by police in Ferguson , Missouri on August 9 .
A spokesman for the administration said Obama `` has directed a review of federal programs and funding that enable state and local law enforcement to purchase military equipment '' .
The review is to consider issues around training and federal oversight .
Senator Claire McCaskill , Democrat of Missouri , announced earlier last week the US Department of Homeland Security 's Financial and Contracting Oversight Subcommittee will have a hearing in September on demilitarization of police forces .
McCaskill said of the events in Ferguson : `` We need to demilitarize this situation -- this kind of response by the police has become the problem instead of the solution '' .
Senator Rand Paul , Republican of Kentucky , wrote an op-ed for Time arguing militarization of the police needed to be ended : `` There is a legitimate role for the police to keep the peace , but there should be a difference between a police response and a military response .
The images and scenes we continue to see in Ferguson resemble war more than traditional police action . ''
Paul also argued race played a part in the provision of justice in the United States : `` Anyone who thinks that race does not still , even if inadvertently , skew the application of criminal justice in this country is just not paying close enough attention .
Our prisons are full of black and brown men and women who are serving inappropriately long and harsh sentences for non-violent mistakes in their youth . ''
The loss was confirmed by Syrian state television , who reported a `` successful evacuation of the airport '' and that the government forces were continuing local operations against `` terrorist groups '' .
This is the third military base in the province to fall to the extremist group in recent weeks , after reports of them seizing weapons during their advances in neighboring Iraq .
Monitoring group Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported over 300 Islamic State fighters were killed in the fighting since Tuesday , with over 150 government soldiers killed in the same time frame .
Clashes reportedly continue in the area around the base .
Elsewhere , Islamic State fighters were reported to have withdrawn from the area around Homs and to have retreated east , giving up the area to fighters of the al-Nusra Front .
Other rebel groups backed by Western countries have also been fighting the Islamic State , but tend to lose those confrontations .
The ongoing fighting is a continuation of the Syrian Civil War , which started in 2011 as protest groups confronted forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad .
Fighters of the Islamic State had previously fought alongside other opposition groups , but its treatment of individuals led to fighting between them .
Abdullah 's observers declined to participate , claiming fraudulent ballots were not being thrown out and questioning the legitimacy of the process .
Ghani 's observers were later asked to withdraw by the United Nations monitors overseeing the process .
They agreed , describing the decision as prudent .
The process of checking each of the eight million votes is part of a deal brokered by the US .
The recount started a month ago .
A spokesman for President Hamid Karzai has said the delay is affecting the country 's security , as the Taliban continue to launch attacks across the country .
Analysts suggest it is also affecting the Afghan economy .
Both candidates have previously agreed to form a unity government involving the other .
Abdullah 's side , trailing before the recount , is looking for more powers and responsibilities for the losing side , while their opposition apparently do n't want to weaken presidential power .
Both candidates also agree US forces should stay in the country after 2014 .
`` We played good finals football today and University are a good side and if you give them too much ball in your territory you 're going to pay for it , '' said Noosa coach Mick Phelan .
Harrold kicked one more penalty goal six minutes into the second half .
This took the score to 13 -- 0 , where it stayed for the rest of the game .
Toads scored a try either side of the ten minute mark to go 14 -- 0 up .
Caloundra scored their first try right on half time .
Toads opened the scoring in the second half with a try .
This score was originally a penalty awarded to Toads but was changed to a try on the advice of a touch judge .
A Caloundra player was sin binned for fighting six minutes later .
A penalty awarded to Caloundra was reversed as a result .
Caloundra scored the next two tries to take the score to 34 -- 17 in Toads ' favour .
Toads scored one more try a minute from full time .
An estimated two thousand people from the skateboarding and surfing communities , and a Wikinews reporter , attended the funeral service and memorial paddle-out and skateboarding session this past Labor Day weekend in California for skateboarding pioneer Jay Adams , who died on August 15 while on a surfing trip with his wife Tracy in Puerto Escondido , Mexico .
Within days after his death several smaller Hawaiian-style paddle-out tributes were also held in his honor from Santa Cruz , California to Jacksonville , Florida .
Broadcast live on the web from Calvary Chapel Costa Mesa on Friday , pastor Raul Ries delivered the eulogy along with Skateboarder Christian Hosoi .
Adams ' own church pastor and one of his closest friends Trip shared personal stories from letters Adams had written him concerning his faith and his desire to be known for being a man of God .
Adams ' step-father Kent Sherwood who taught Adams how to surf when he was just three years old , also shared personal stories about Adams when he was just starting to surf and skateboard as a young child .
With clear skies and warm sunny weather on Saturday , hundreds of surfers , amongst them long time friends of Adam 's from the Z-Boys , held a large memorial paddle-out tribute mid-day on the north side of the Venice Beach Pier .
Chants of `` Jay Jay Jay '' could be heard from the pier as onlookers watched water being splashed about into the air by the hundreds of people perched on their surfboards .
Los Angeles County fire department boats and lifeguards were on hand to add to the paddle-out by spraying their water cannons high into the air and blowing their horns , while monitoring everyone 's safety .
Later in the afternoon nearby a skateboarding session was held at the Venice beach skate park also in Adams ' honor .
Adams became an influential figure in skateboarding and its culture during the mid-seventies when he was a teenager , skateboarding with the Zephyr team in Southern California .
His story was featured in the films Dogtown and Z-Boys and Lords of Dogtown and he was inducted into the skateboarding hall of fame in 2012 .
Later in life Adams became a Christian and found a purpose in helping the next generation of skaters and surfers by speaking to the public with positive messages about making good choices in life , along with other notable skateboarder Dennis Martinez .
Adams is the second member of the Z-Boys to die this year , Shogo Kubo died while surfing in Hawaii in June .
Since the 2010 NATO summit in Lisbon , Portugal countries involved in the International Security Assistance Force -LRB- ISAF -RRB- , NATO 's military operation in Afghanistan , have been committed to full transition of security responsibilities to Afghan forces by the end of 2014 .
This would mark the end of ISAF 's 13 year mission in Afghanistan , with troops changing to a training and assistance role .
Plans had originally intended for Afghanistan 's new President , or President-elect , to attend this year 's summit , but due to the political situation and ongoing election process it is still unknown who will replace outgoing President Hamid Karzai .
Bismullah Khan Muhammadi , the country 's defence minister , instead attended the summit in the absence of a President .
This political stalemate has put at risk NATO plans for a continuing military presence in the country , with troops expected to pull out at the end of the year without new security agreements being signed , signature not possible without a new President in place .
NATO members have urged Afghanistan 's presidential candidates to reach an agreement , with officials indicating that if no agreement can be reached by the end of the month , then troops would begin to leave .
On Thursday , NATO leaders pledged support for Ukraine at a meeting with the country 's President , Petro Poroshenko , in the face of recent moves from Russia .
On their website , NATO outlined four areas where the alliance would provide support for Ukraine , `` rehabilitation for injured troops , cyber defence , logistics , and command and control and communications '' , with assistance expected to have a monetary value of about 15 million euros -LRB- about US$ 19 million -RRB- .
On Friday , peace talks in Minsk , Belarus resulted in a ceasefire agreement between Ukraine and rebel forces , whom NATO has accused Russia of supporting in their bid for separation of eastern regions of Ukraine .
The UK said sanctions being prepared are likely to go ahead , regardless of the outcome of these talks , until it is seen that Russia is acting upon them .
On Friday morning , a meeting of ten countries chaired by the UK and US agreed to jointly working to combat the threat posed by the Islamic State in the Middle East .
John Kerry , US Secretary of State , stated after the meeting that the group should aim to make firm plans and raise support from within the region affected before the UN General Assembly annual meeting later this month .
Philip Hammond , UK Foreign Secretary , also said it was clear that regional support was needed , adding `` with a new and inclusive Government of Iraq leading the efforts '' .
Plans for a Readiness Action Plan were agreed at the summit .
Speaking on Monday before the summit , NATO 's secretary general , Anders Fogh Rasmussen , described this as a response to `` Russia 's aggressive behaviour '' , but outlined how he hoped it would increase the responsiveness of the alliance to face any security challenge .
These plans aim to allow reinforcements to reach any NATO member state within 48 hours , in what Rasmussen described as a `` spearhead '' of the preexisting Response Force .
This requires logistical , and headquarters facilities to be set up in Eastern European countries , the ones most under threat from an attack by Russia , or the Islamic State .
These plans are also to be rehearsed through joint military exercises .
Friday , November 7 , 2014 Albuquerque , New Mexico -- Online entertainment is a booming market , and plenty of players are making their play ; back in March of this year The Walt Disney Company bought the multi-channel network Maker Studios .
And , who are the people venturing into this field ?
Wikinews interviewed Mario Lucero and Isabel Ruiz , the founders of Heaven Sent Gaming , a small entertainment team .
This group has been responsible for several publications , within several different media formats ; one successful example was aywv , a gaming news website , which was # 1 in Gaming on YouTube in 2009 , from September to November ; Heaven Sent Gaming was also the subject of a referential book , released in 2014 , entitled Internet Legends - Heaven Sent Gaming .
Like the Bible translation , it 's going to eventually evolve into a Bible reading , and then a Bible study , and then it 's going to have individual notes on each Bible verse , and things like that .
aywv 's gon na spin off into podcasts , and all kinds of things underneath it .
And , yes , the website is also a web project , I think of it like a magazine , where you find all the things we 're making .
-LRB- -LRB- Wikinews -RRB- -RRB- What are your thoughts on the book that was written about you ?
And I also feel like in a capitalistic society , checks and balances happen when there is competition .
Mario : I would like to add one more thing .
I want to talk about dementia again , and that neuroscience is very important to me because , my grandfather used to go out for walks every morning , used to eat organic , he used to be one of those crazy people that thought the fluoride in the water would kill you , and I 'm one of those people as well because of him .
And that 's what makes it very difficult to gauge .
I feel like it kind of depends on each person , as to what they want to do with it .
And , that 's really good , and I think that 's going to be really good for media .
And , I think it 's going to be really bad for older media , which is where you do get the `` new media '' , which is why I do n't like it , 'cause I think media is just evolving , just like any other form of art , or entertainment , or anything like that ; media just slowly evolves , and I think this is just the next evolutionary step in it .
Isabel : Making ends meet .
We are looking more into making this a proper business , and making this have money so that we can do this full time .
Mario : This goes back to the prior topic , -LSB- ... -RSB- they were talking about new media .
And you hope that this can generate money for you , but it 's not the main priority of it .
Money is a driving force , obviously , of everything in our daily lives , but it 's not the end-all-be-all .
And new media entrepreneurs usually tend to show that .
Mario : What I was gon na say though , is that , you have people like -- Toby Turner , at first he did n't make any money off of it .
As a lot of people know , when we started up a lot of Heaven Sent Gaming , like the first few years , we were taking care of his -LRB- Mario 's -RRB- grandparents , they were suffering through dementia at the time .
We stated it basically , because I wanted to -- I wanted to work with Isabel on a lot of projects that we had going on together .
Mario : Which is how were going to turn this into a business , which is how were going to turn this into a money making venture .
For example , Jeff who is handling the camera during this interview , we have a lot of good ideas for some video series .
And they 're going to be really entertaining , and we really want to bring it out to our fans and to the people that follow us , and we hope you 'll stick around for that .
Isabel : And , I can not express my thanks to our fans enough , they are absolutely great and amazing people .
There is definitely a lot more freedom in publishing our own work , because , in the end of the day , we get to say what we want to actually go out there , -LSB- ... -RSB- to say , what we want to say , the message that we want to put forth .
So you have to build the stage -LSB- ... -RSB- you 're going to perform on .
For example , I 've worked with bigger clients , I 've working with people , and I 've had deadlines , I 've had to do all those things , right .
Isabel : Just getting everything right .
My mother -LSB- Cathleen Lucero -RSB- is a , she 's worked a lot of different jobs , she 's a working class woman .
-LSB- ... -RSB- And before my father became a teacher , he was a small business owner , he did windshields for cars and would replace them , and go to wherever you were at and did that .
They both decided `` let 's go to college '' , my mom got her master 's degree , and my dad got his bachelor 's , and now they 're teachers .
But , before hand in middle school , I kept on hearing about this guy named Mario , and he kept on hearing about me , this girl named Isabel .
And , everyone , all of our friends and all of our acquaintances would say , `` Hey , you 'd get along with him really well . ''
I watched a lot of Anime , that needs its own little section there .
And , I make shoes that I would wear -- I do n't make shoes -- not yet , give it time .
And plus , it 's not like it 's a form of religion , I 'm using it more for my own identity , and it 's a part of me , and I 'm using Heaven Sent Gaming as an artistic medium , so regardless , it 's going to enter into it , because it 's a part of me .
And I 'm going to be putting a lot of what I am into it .
And I 'm not doing it to cram religion down people 's throats .
Like , Jason , our editor , he 's an atheist and I have no problem with that , he agrees with out stance in bringing light into media , and that 's all that matters .
Mario : And , with religion and spirituality being prominent in our work , -LSB- ... -RSB- it 's good to get it in there because it 's a representation of ourselves , we 're putting ourselves into this work .
Isabel : This starts out with Reverie .
United Feature Syndicate , they responded to us , and they said , `` well , this is really good , but honestly we feel like it would be better if you just did this yourself . ''
We 're talking about doing some individual web series , video series .
Josh Kindig , he 's coming on board , he has some ideas for that too , he wants to take over `` aywv '' and do more gaming news .
Isabel : My parents live in a two-story house .
And , Mario saw this face in the wood paneling , and he decided to crudely sketch it , draw it .
Because there 's Reverie which is comedy Sunday happy-go-lucky , and then TWD and Karis that get really heavy and serious , so we wanted something a little bit more funny .
They 're all based on real people , but it 's a heavily fictionalized universe , like Byron is based on that kid Byron Alvarez who 's not a kid no more , he 's a man .
Mario is based on this kid named Mario Lucero , which is me sometimes , most the time , all the times .
And there 's Kevin who is based on Kevin Garner , and Isabel who is based on -- Catalina Fernando ?
I always ask , like , `` Do you think President Obama eats Chicken McNuggets ? ''
`` Do you think George W. Bush ever sits down and thinks , ` Man , I want a root beer ' ? ''
Mario : Well , back in college , back in Collins College , Isabel and I , we had met like she said at Sandia View Academy , and we went off to college together in Arizona ; and ... -LRB- how do I best explain this ? -RRB-
Those included Drew Cass , Devin Thurlow , people like that .
-LSB- Mario then proceeded to purposefully mispronounce things -RSB-
Isabel : Back in college , we developed a video game that , we hope , will eventually come into fruition when we find that `` good programmer '' .
Isabel : I did a prototype of it , because somehow it managed to pop up in my class before theirs .
Isabel : And for me , what I want the purpose to be , is to inspire people .
To bring a little more light to the world is what I want , out of all of this .
I am very interested in country music , but I 'm mostly a person that likes to mix and master audio .
Mrs. Hargrove , our teacher , she wanted me to sing in the front , because she said that I sound just like Johnny Cash , so I was like , whoa , I do n't think I do , 'cause I was a teenager , and I was nervous about everything , I was like `` No , no . ''
Mario : Yes , I took writing courses in college , and I 've gone through the MLA Handbook , I 've gone through all those things .
We would just publish directly ,
That was pretty much as far as the editing process goes , back then .
Beforehand it was just Mario shooting his vlogs , and we would do all of our let 's plays .
Isabel : With the Google AdSense thing , that came at a very bad time in our lives .
There 's a certain point where they 're getting lost , but then it seems to happen overnight where it just gets really really bad , they 're constantly confused and scared , it 's really awful .
Mario : It was starting to make money for us , then Google shut it down , and then I just decided that I needed to focus on my grandparents .
I forget which celebrity it was , recently , went in front of a congressional panel , was it Seth Rogen ?
Mario : And , he discussed dementia , and it felt so good to see someone who understood , because it 's a scary thing .
Most people think it 's just where you get lost , and you do n't know what you 're doing .
But with my grandpa , he was a strong masculine influence in my life , and he was scared and did n't know where he was going .
In fact one time , he told me , `` Mijito , I do n't know where I am .
And my Nana , she was such a compassionate person , and here she was scared .
We just want to be able to bring , like she said , bring light into the entertainment and into the media industry , specifically is what we do .
Mario : Well , when Google shut down the AdSense account .
Mario and Isabel remarked further on lessons from the AdSense incident in their post-interview notes , linked below .
They also noted Seth Rogen spoke at a Senate committee rather than a congressional panel ; Rogen 's opening statements are available at C-SPAN .
I think it 's in reference to the recent scandal that happened over at Kotaku .
I 'll still say if it 's a shit product .
Like , Alex Jones is a good example of the two , Alex Jones is a person who shaped something up like that , in the same way that The Young Turks did , where it 's about news and media but he did his own thing , and with the help of the internet , which is was `` new media '' usually refers to nowadays , internet media has been booming because of people like him ; they built a whole system around it , and that 's fascinating .
But on the other side , if you 're talking about Christian media , I do n't know which your referring to , with Christian media it 's a little bit more difficult to gauge the Christian media market , because it 's a niche market , and you have things that are extremely successful like Big Idea Productions which became huge off of VeggieTales , and it 's now owned by Dreamworks .
Because Heaven Sent Gaming kind of fits into two categories ; it 's a new media thing , which I do n't like the term `` new media '' , and it 's a Christian venture , and in both respects with `` new media '' , in particular , whenever a new format comes into being it 's hard to gauge what celebrities , and what people , and and what companies are doing things to really shake up things , and really bring new things to the table .
And They 're even getting that translated into Japanese now , so they 've spun that into an entire multimedia conglomerate .
They formatted and created a way for this to become monetized , for you to be able to release things on your own and make it into something special and unique .
And then , let 's see , other people that are up there .
University are now scheduled to play Noosa in the 2014 Sunshine Coast Rugby Union grand final at Sunshine Coast Stadium next weekend .
A highlight was touch judge Steve Ryan seen laughing with the nearby crowd briefly before continuing his duties .
The second half saw three tries scored .
Toads scored the opening try at thirteen minutes to take the score to 10 -- 5 .
University scored the first converted try eight minutes later to take the lead -- 12 -- 10 to Uni .
They sealed the victory with thirteen minutes left in the game with a converted try .
But Scotland says they can still win the premiership decider .
`` If we 're patient for the whole game we will do all right , but there were some points there where we tried to play a game of touch football , and you ca n't do that -LSB- ... -RSB- If we can work on that patience we should give ourselves a good chance against Noosa . ''
Libya 's government , currently located in the eastern city of Tobruk , say a Sudanese transport plane entered Libyan airspace on Thursday bound for Tripoli 's Matiga airport , before making a refueling stop at the southern town of Kufra .
During an inspection at Kufra , ammunition was found which Libya accused Sudan of intending to supply to the rebels .
Sudan have denied the accusation , claiming the ammunition was intended for a joint border force of the two countries targeting smuggling and human trafficking .
Libya have said they had not given permission for the plane to enter the country 's airspace .
An international arms embargo , first imposed during the 2011 Libyan uprising , is still in effect .
A statement from the Libyan government made reference to this , saying the incident `` represents a clear violation of international resolutions '' .
Algeria and Tunisia are both reinforcing their borders with Libya , following an arms-smuggling incident .
The US has previously accused Egypt and the United Arab Emirates of launching aerial attacks on Tripoli .
The current outbreak of the virus in West Africa is believed to have killed 2,100 people , including 79 health workers .
The UK military have said they will build a 50 bed centre near Sierra Leone 's capital , with the US saying it would send a 25 bed field hospital .
This falls short of the 1,000 beds an investigative team from WHO says is needed in Liberia 's capital , Monrovia , alone .
The African Union also warned of the economic impact of the outbreak , urging a lifting of travel bans and border closures .
WHO have previously warned that such travel restrictions increased the chance of food shortages .
An agreement made yesterday is expected to lead to those restrictions imposed in the last few months being lifted .
Prime Minister David Cameron expressed his congratulations : `` Many congratulations to the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge .
I 'm delighted by the happy news that they 're expecting another baby . ''
Leader of the Opposition Ed Miliband also congratulated the couple : `` Fantastic to hear that Prince George will soon be a big brother .
U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry visited Baghdad yesterday to meet Haider al-Abadi , the prime minister of the new Iraqi government .
The visit came as Kerry toured seeking support in the region -- military , political , and financial -- against the Islamic State .
Kerry and al-Abadi were to discuss international efforts to build a coalition , in a regional approach to the security issue posed by Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria .
The meeting came ahead of U.S. President Barack Obama 's televised address , to air later in the day in the U.S. and set to announce expanded military efforts to `` degrade and ultimately destroy '' the organisation .
They were to `` discuss how the United States can increase its support to Iraq 's new government in our common effort to defeat Isil -LSB- Islamic State -RSB- and the threat it poses to Iraq , the region , and the world '' , said State Department spokesperson Jen Psaki .
The Shia Iraqi prime minister has , according to U.S. officials , promised to create regional national guards , avoiding security enforcement by the mostly Shia Iraqi army in Sunni regions .
The policy , if enacted , would provide valuable employment in areas where Islamic State has recruited successfully following economic neglect during the eight years of Nouri al-Maliki 's government .
Following the Iraq visit Kerry is to visit Saudi Arabia as part of the broad U.S. strategy of regional resistance against the militants .
President Obama has said the U.S. would not use ground combat troops , but some senior military figures have suggested Islamic State may not be stopped by air strikes alone -- of which the U.S. have used 150 over the past month .
The regional strategy to address the security crisis does not rely on the support of Congress .
The U.S. administration has been urging representatives to approve $ 500m to support rebels in Syrian opposing Islamic State , but the legislation has been immobile since it was first proposed in May .
Paisley 's wife Eileen released a statement saying : `` My beloved husband , Ian , entered his eternal rest this morning .
We loved him and he adored us , and our earthly lives are forever changed . ''
Paisley helped form the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster in the early 1950s , later going into politics under the banner of the Democratic Unionist Party -LRB- DUP -RRB- .
Paisley 's fiery preaching was uncompromising and fundamentalist : he was once expelled from the European Parliament for calling Pope John Paul II the `` anti-christ '' .
When Northern Ireland was debating the decriminalisation of homosexuality , Paisley led a campaign opposing the change titled `` Save Ulster from Sodomy '' .
Politically , Paisley became known as `` Dr No '' for his attitude towards compromise with republicans .
This firebrand rhetoric calmed with the successful negotiation of a peace process and with Paisley entering into shared governance with Sinn Féin 's Martin McGuinness .
McGuinness paid tribute to Paisley via Twitter : `` Very sad to learn that Ian Paisley has died .
McGuinness also said of Paisley : `` I want to pay tribute to and comment on the work he did in the latter days of his political life in building agreement and leading unionism into a new accommodation with republicans and nationalists . ''
UK Prime Minister David Cameron described Paisley as `` one of the most forceful and instantly recognisable characters in British politics for nearly half a century '' and noted that Paisley 's willingness to enter into shared governance with republicans `` required great courage and leadership , for which everyone in these islands should be grateful '' .
The current First Minister Peter Robinson said Paisley `` was the founding father of the new Northern Ireland '' .
Former UK Prime Minister Tony Blair said Paisley `` began as the militant '' but `` ended as the peacemaker '' .
Noosa got to the premiership decider after finishing on top of the standings and winning the Major Semi Final at Sunshine Beach .
University finished second , lost the Major Semi Final to Noosa and defeated Toads at the University of the Sunshine Coast .
The two teams last met in a grand final in 2011 .
Kazantsev said she was a victim of domestic violence ; `` It was something that definitely changed me -LSB- ... -RSB- I 'm better now and I 'm stronger now .
The Libyan leader told the United Arab Emirates -LRB- UAE -RRB- - based Arab TV channel Sky News his country would consider `` breaking off relations if this interference into Libya 's internal affairs continued . ''
He also reiterated previous accusations against Sudan of also trying to supply the rebels .
Qatar has previously backed the Muslim Brotherhood , a group reported to have ties with the militants in Tripoli .
Other countries , including Egypt and UAE , are reportedly worried about the spread of radical Islam .
Three years after the removal from power of Muammar Gaddafi , Libya now has two competing governments , one in Tripoli , and one in Tobruk where the most recently elected parliament has moved to escape the violence .
Rival militias fight each other , and a renegade general is reportedly confronting the Libyan army .
The International Organization for Migration -LRB- IOM -RRB- said on Monday about 500 migrants may have been killed in a deliberate sinking in the Mediterranean Sea last week .
The unverified claim comes after IOM debriefed two Palestinian survivors .
In a statement , IOM said , `` If this story , which police are investigating , is true , it would be the worst shipwreck in years '' .
The organization added , if the story would be revealed as true it would be `` not an accident but a mass murder , perpetrated by criminals without scruples or any respect for human life '' .
IOM Spokesperson in Italy Flavio Di Giacomo told AFP , `` Two survivors brought to Sicily told us that there had been at least 500 people on board .
Nine other survivors were rescued by Greek and Maltese ships , but all the rest appear to have perished '' .
According to the two survivors , the boat , which departed on September 6 from Damietta , Egypt bound for Malta , sank in the Mediterranean Sea last Wednesday when people smugglers rammed it ; drowning the vast majority of its 500 plus passengers , including refugees from Egypt , Sudan , Syria and Palestine .
They said the smugglers had become angry when the passengers refused transfer to a smaller vessel that they doubted could carry them .
Many people from North Africa and the Middle East attempt to reach Europe on overcrowded , unsafe boats .
Over 2,500 people on this journey have drowned or disappeared this year , 2,200 of them since June .
A Texas man was rescued earlier this week after being adrift at sea for 31 hours , according to media reports on Monday .
Joey Trevino , 37 , was stranded along with three other men after their boat quickly sank off the coast of Port O'Connor , Texas .
With only their life jackets as support , the men floated in the water , unsure if they would be rescued .
Reportedly , the boat sank before the men could radio for help .
Trevino told reporters he could see the right-most engine at the rear of the boat sinking as the front of the boat rapidly elevated .
Three of the men were rescued by a supply boat about 24 hours after the sinking .
The US Coast Guard was then notified that Trevino was still lost at sea .
He was rescued 7 hours later , when a passing freight ship heard his cries for help .
Reportedly , Trevino floated about 50 miles before being rescued .
A Coast Guard spokesman stated that water temperatures in the mid-80 's was a positive factor in Trevino 's survival .
To maintain strength , Trevino told reporters , `` You 're looking at the clouds , you 're looking at whatever . ''
Trevino stated he did wonder to himself , `` Wow , should I just take off this jacket , and let it be over ? ''
His courage was bolstered when he was bumped by a porpoise .
`` He kind of bumped me and I kind of rubbed him and he kind of changed my attitude right there , '' Trevino told media .
Residents of Scotland voted against becoming an independent nation yesterday in the Scottish independence referendum .
The country is to remain part of the United Kingdom .
In a turnout of 84.6 % of some 4.3 million eligible voters , 55 % voted against and 45 % voted for the proposition `` Should Scotland be an independent country ? '' .
Polling stations opened at 7.00 a.m on the 18th with queues outside some of the 5,579 stations , and many were busy until the polls closed at 22.00 p.m. Overnight , after the first result was announced at 1:30 a.m. , the `` No '' vote slowly edged ahead .
Just after 6:00 a.m. , with the declaration of the results for Fife , the `` No '' campaign attained an unassailable lead .
With the final declaration by the Highland Council this gave a final total of 1,617,989 `` Yes '' and 2,001,926 `` No '' votes .
Celebrating the continuation of the Union , Alistair Darling , leader of the pro-union Better Together campaign , addressing `` No '' campaign workers said `` You represent the majority of opinion and your voices have been heard .
Following the defeat , a defiant Alex Salmond , leader of the pro-independence Scottish National Party , said `` Thank you to Scotland for 1.6 million votes for Scottish independence '' and `` Scotland by majority has decided not at this stage to become an independent country '' .
Salmond concluded : `` Let us not dwell on the distance we have fallen short , but on the distance we have come . ''
On the package of greater devolved powers for Scotland promised late in the day to the Scottish people , Cameron said : `` We will ensure that those commitments are honoured in full . ''
Promising that in delivering the `` vow '' a parallel process will address the West Lothian question and work towards greater devolution of powers to Wales , Northern Ireland , and at Westminster , English only votes on English issues .
35 students of Jadavpur University , Kolkata , India protesting against an August 28 sexual assault case in the university , were arrested by police in the early morning of Wednesday .
The arrests and alleged baton charge on students led to further protests on Wednesday , including a rally attended by around 3500 people in the evening .
The protesting students demanded a fresh probe into a molestation incident in which a female student of the university was allegedly sexually abused by male university students who had dragged her to a men 's hostel .
The students ` gheraoed ' -- encircled -- the vice-chancellor , Abhijit Chakrabarti , over the incident , demanding a new probe committee be set up and the internal probe committee be dissolved .
According to students , the current internal probe committee include people who they alleged ` harassed the victim ' .
The gherao continued for about ten hours by Chakrabarti 's account , preventing the vice-chancellor and the registrar from leaving the campus .
Students claim they were peacefully protesting and that they had not obstructed any official .
According to Chakrabarti , he `` was forced to call police '' as he `` would have died at -LSB- the protesters ' -RSB- hands had the police not come '' ; after escorting him out , they arrested 35 students from the campus , including one female student .
Police said they later released all the arrested students on personal bond .
Students allege police turned the lights off and assaulted them , dragging them and charging them with batons .
They also state there were very few women police , and male officers assaulted female students .
At least three students were confirmed to have been admitted to the nearby KPC Medical College and Hospital with pain .
The students lodged a complaint against certain university and police officials , including Chakrabarti and Additional Commissioner of Police Debasish Roy , on Wednesday morning .
The complaint alleged `` goons from a reputed political party walked over bodies of the women after switching the lights off '' .
Police deny the students ' allegations , claiming there were about 40 female police officers , and that students had not been manhandled or assaulted .
State education minister Partha Chatterjee , of the West Bengal ruling Trinamool Congress party , `` condemned '' the agitation , suggesting students `` were trying to create trouble on the campus . ''
Leaders of other parties criticized the incident and the vice-chancellor 's actions .
The vice-chancellor stated the students damaged the lights in the campus and he `` saw students trying to attack me '' when police escorted him out of the building .
In protest of the alleged police assault , a rally was organized for 4pm on Wednesday , beginning from the campus and ending at Golpark .
Around 3500 people participated in the rally , including students from other colleges and universities of the city .
Students of Jadavpur University have decided to indefinitely boycott classes starting from Wednesday .
Protests continued on Thursday with certain student unions calling for a student 's strike , by all college and Class X to XII students .
Officials said at least fifteen people were killed in an attack on a teachers training college in the Northern Nigerian city of Kano by a group of armed gunmen on Wednesday .
News agencies have reported while there has been no claim of responsibility , suspicion will likely fall on the Islamist extremist group Boko Haram .
The group has previously targeted Western-style schools within the country , including past attacks on secondary schools .
According to official reports , police first approached the group in the area of the school , concerned about their unusual activity , and the attackers engaged police in a firefight .
The attackers gained entry to the school and started throwing bombs .
Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan described the incident as a `` dastardly attack '' .
China prepared for the storms by recalling nearly 33,000 ships and boats to port , and the preemptive evacuation of over 250,000 people from vulnerable areas .
Fung-Wong was moving inland , northwards and eastwards , and as it did so wind speeds and the possibility of wind damage should diminish however it should continue to present a flooding risk .
The storm was expected to hit Shanghai today , and around 100,000 people were placed on standby to deal with possible flooding .
Fung-wong should also lead to heavy rain in Japan and South Korea bringing with it the threat of flash floods .
Prior to hitting China , Fung-wong had previously landed in Taiwan and the Philippines , leading directly to one death in Taiwan .
Philippine officials said flooding and strong winds caused a minimum of ten deaths in the Philippines , with about 200,000 people displaced from their homes .
Authorities , including a spokesman for the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives , said they suspected an FAA contractor set the basement on fire , but did not believe him to be a terrorist .
Another employee was treated for smoke inhalation .
Flights already en-route to the Chicago metropolitan area were still allowed to either continue more slowly or divert to another unaffected airport .
The FAA said passengers in the area and surrounding airports and possibly airports around the region , might experience flight delays or cancellations , causing long lines at airports , and encouraged them to check flight information with their carriers .
The British National Party -LRB- BNP -RRB- , a UK political party , has expelled Nick Griffin , previously for fifteen years its leader .
The party stated they informed Griffin of their decision yesterday and gave multiple reasons for the expulsion , including distributing inaccurate information , trying to damage the party 's public image , harassment of staff members , and defying instructions given to him by current leader Adam Walker .
Griffin has said he was '' ` expelled ' without trial '' and the BNP violated its constitution .
Griffin was BNP chairman until July , when he quit the role and became honorary president ; acting chairman Adam Walker took his place .
Griffin was elected North West England MEP -LRB- Member of the European Parliament -RRB- in 2009 but lost the seat in the 2014 election .
Under Griffin 's tenure , the party reportedly experienced an increase in success , gaining more than 50 councillors in the UK and two MEPs in 2009 , Griffin being one and the other Andrew Brons .
However , more recently the party has reportedly had monetary difficulties and internal disputes , as well as disagreements over what attitudes the party should adopt .
Brons departed from the BNP in 2012 and went on to form his own political party , the British Democratic Party .
The BNP 's political support has significantly declined in recent years ; its percentage vote share in the European Parliament elections in North West England dipped from 6.1 % in 2009 to 1.9 % in 2014 , while most of the party 's councillors have lost their positions .
Also , in January Nick Griffin was declared bankrupt .
`` This has been a difficult decision to make and not one taken lightly '' , a member of a conduct committee within the BNP commented .
`` Although we all appreciate that Nick has achieved a lot for our Party in the past , we must also remember that the Party is bigger than any individual .
Nick did not adjust well to being given the honourary title of President and it soon became obvious that he was unable to work as an equal member of the team and alarmingly his behaviour became more erratic and disruptive . ''
Griffin 's response to this expulsion from the party was to tweet : `` Breaking news !
That 'll teach me to tell a member of staff he 's a ` useless , lazy twat ' '' .
In a later tweet , he added : `` Only thing is that the ruling Wigton Soviet are operating outside the constitution so I shall ignore their plastic gangster games . ''
Accompanied by those officials , he assured Texas citizens that steps were being taken to protect the public 's safety .
Perry specifically said , `` There are few places in the world better equipped to meet the challenge that is posed in this case . ''
The governor also stated , `` Today , we learned that some school aged children have been identified as having had contact with the patient . ''
Rest assured that our system is working as well as it should . ''
-LSB- ... -RSB- the patient here in Dallas , he 's getting tremendous care in a very good medical facility . ''
The man 's condition on Wednesday was listed as serious .
Protestors in Hong Kong have called for the resignation of CY Leung , the Chief Executive of Hong Kong , and vowed to continue the protests .
If their demands are not met today , the protestors have said they will start occupying government buildings .
Tens of thousands of protestors -- some affiliated with the ` Occupy Central ' movement -- have kept up a demonstration for seven days against plans by the Chinese government to screen candidates seeking to be on the ballot for the 2017 election .
If he does n't resign by tomorrow -LSB- Thursday -RSB- , we will step up our actions , such as by occupying several important government buildings '' .
He said there was `` no room for dialogue '' with CY Leung after the police fired tear gas at protestors .
Chan Kin-man , another leader in the movement , said : `` I hope people will understand why the action keeps on escalating .
It 's because the government is getting more and more closed without listening to Hong Kong people . ''
United States Secretary of State John Kerry urged the Hong Kong authorities to `` exercise restraint and respect for the protesters ' right to express their views peacefully '' and said Hong Kong needs to have the `` highest possible degree of autonomy '' .
Kerry stated the US position was support for `` universal suffrage in Hong Kong , accordant with the Basic Law '' .
Wang Yi , the Chinese Foreign Minister , appearing alongside John Kerry , said the protests were illegal and warned : `` Hong Kong affairs are China 's internal affairs .
All countries should respect China 's sovereignty .
For any country , for any society , no-one will allow those illegal acts that violate public order . ''
People 's Daily , a newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party , published the following : `` Hong Kong has for many years enjoyed peace and harmony .
It now sees the emergence of this embarrassing ` chaos ' , and the root cause lies with a few people who are disrespecting the law '' .
US biologists from the Universities of Pittsburgh and Vermont have found that social spiders of species Anelosimus studiosus exhibit apparent group selection , determining a trait affecting the colony 's survival .
According to one of the researchers , this is the first experimental evidence of group selection in wild populations driving adaptation to local conditions .
The study was published in journal Nature on Wednesday .
The researchers found that , depending on the availability of resources at the location of the colony and the size of the colony , the spider colonies have a different composition , promoting colony survival .
The collective colony trait the scientists analyzed is the shifting ratio of `` aggressive '' and `` docile '' female spiders .
The authors suggest two possible causes of colony extinction from inappropriate ratio in a large colony , depending on the availability of resources : egg cannibalism when there are few resources and a high proportion of `` aggressive '' female spiders , and social parasites when there are abundant resources and a high proportion of `` docile '' female spiders .
To check whether the self-regulation of spider colonies can be considered an adaptation to local conditions , the scientists placed artificially assembled colonies in different locations , with resource availability similar to or different from their home location .
In cases of high risk of extinction , colonies self-regulated the ratio of `` aggressive '' and `` docile '' female spiders to match not resource conditions of the site they were placed at , but resource conditions of the home site from which they were taken .
Coauthor Jonathan Pruitt , University of Pittsburgh assistant professor of behavioral ecology , said , `` These findings provide compelling evidence that the mechanisms that colonies use to regulate their compositions are themselves locally adapted , presumably because of the survival advantages they confer to the colony '' .
`` They 're continuing to make the phenotypes , the trait at a group level , that would have been advantageous if they had stayed home -LSB- ... -RSB- But they seem to have no idea that they 're at a new site and that what they 're doing is going to doom the whole colony .
Hamilton confirmed Howard University Hospital admitted the patient in stable condition .
The patient had been to Nigeria , where some cases of the Ebola virus have occurred .
The hospital has followed protocol for infection control , including separating the patient from others to prevent possible infection of others .
Police in riot gear cordoned off the roads and alleyways that surround the intersection , before moving in with trucks equipped with mechanical grabs to clear the roads of makeshift barricades .
Also removed were tents , personal belongings , bedding and any other material protesters could n't retrieve in time .
The police action effectively dispersed the majority of the protesters from the site .
Protesters were moved onto the sidewalk by the police ; when they could no longer be accommodated on the sidewalk they spilled into the alleyways , and down Nathan Road towards Tsim Sha Tsui .
Once they had crossed the police cordon they were not allowed to return to the intersection .
A small number of protesters remained on the pavements surrounding the intersection .
Protesters have been demonstrating in a bid for the right by the public at large to have a role in the nomination of candidates to stand for the post of Chief Executive of the territory .
According to Hamas deputy leader Mousa Abu Marzook , the negotiations will begin next Monday , and will include several issues that have yet to be properly finalized during the previous talks .
These issues include the building of a marine port in the Strip and the reopening of the Gaza airport , the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip and the issue of the Palestinian prisoners .
Senior Hamas leader in Gaza Mahmoud al-Zahar said , however , the talks will not touch on the subject of exchange of prisoners or dead bodies .
He added , `` The issue of prisoners ' swap is completely isolated from the other issues related to reinforcing the ceasefire and restoring calm in the Gaza Strip '' .
The Palestinian delegation to next week 's talks are to be led by Fatah representative Azzam el-Ahmad , with delegates from the Palestine Liberation Organization -LRB- PLO -RRB- , from Hamas , and from the Palestinian Islamic Jihad .
AFP reported no response from Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to an inquiry regarding renewal of talks .
On August 26 , following 50 days of conflict that caused a great deal of damage and many casualties , a ceasefire between the Israeli military and the armed factions in the Gaza Strip was carried into effect , thanks to understandings between the two sides brokered by Egypt .
Those talks ended with an agreement to return and discuss the treaty by the end of October .
One gunman is dead , police confirm , following a shooting incident on Parliament Hill in Ottawa , the capital of Canada , today that killed a Canadian Forces guard at the National War Memorial .
This occurs after two Canadian Forces members were struck two days ago by a vehicle reportedly driven by a jihadist sympathizer , leaving one member dead .
Reports from witnesses state that after shooting the soldier , the gunman seized a car and drove to the nearby Centre Block building , where witnesses report several shots fired .
Members of Parliament and other witnesses inside Centre Block report inside this building the House of Commons Sergeant-at-Arms shot and killed the gunman .
Authorities noted another vehicle parked in a no parking zone at the nearby Langevin Block with no rear license plate , and sent explosive detection robots to the area .
A helicopter and a small airplane collided near Frederick Municipal Airport in Frederick , Maryland just after 3:40 local time yesterday afternoon -LRB- 1940 UTC -RRB- .
The collision was reported around a mile -LRB- one and a half kilometres -RRB- from the airport , just north of Interstate 70 .
The Federal Aviation Administration -LRB- FAA -RRB- said the Robinson R44 helicopter was on a training mission when it collided with a Cirrus SR-22 .
Both people aboard the Cirrus were injured and all three aboard the helicopter were killed in the collision .
Last week , Egypt encouraged the sides to return to the negotiations table today , in order to further discuss several issues yet to be agreed upon by the end of the last negotiations round .
Hamas sources say attacks in the Sinai peninsula have prevented the talks from occurring in their original date .
The head of the Palestinian delegation , Azzam al-Ahmad , said the talks are to be renewed during mid - to late November .
However , Hamas spokesperson Fawzy Barhoum told Ma'an News Agency `` It 's Egypt that will set a new date for indirect talks brokered by Egypt , and Hamas will be invited to that round of talks '' .
Sir Nicholas Winton , MBE visited the Czech Republic today and received the Order of the White Lion from the hands of president Miloš Zeman .
As a British citizen in Czechoslovakia in the late 1930s , Winton , now 105 , saved 669 mostly Jewish children from future Nazi oppression organizing their transport to safety .
The decoration took place in the Prague Castle , separate from the evening ceremony where other distinguished people is to be awarded , in respect to Sir Nicholas 's health .
Winton was accompanied by his family members and met several children he saved .
During the same ceremony , Miloš Zeman awarded the Order of the White Lion in memoriam also to the late Winston Churchill , who was the United Kingdom 's prime minister during World War II and led the country as a major part of the anti-Hitler coalition to victory over Nazi Germany .
Churchill 's grandson Nicholas Soames accepted the order .
During the ceremony , Zeman apologized for the delay before Winton eventually received these honors , and said `` Great thanks for all children you saved '' -LRB- -LRB- cz -RRB- -RRB- Czech language : Velké díky za všechny děti , které jste zachránil .
Winton replied `` I want to thank you all for this enormous expression of thankgiving for something that happened to me nearly a hundred years ago '' -LRB- -LRB- cz -RRB- -RRB- Czech language : Rád bych poděkoval všem za tento neuvěřitelný výraz vděku za něco , co jsem udělal snad před sto lety .
The Order of the White Lion is the highest Czech Republic decoration , awarded to the statesmen and other individuals `` to recognize superior accomplishments contributing to the welfare of the Czech Republic '' , as the act of the state decorations defines .
With the exception of a few statesmen in office , Winton and Winston Churchill have been the first people to receive the order in the civil division in eleven years .
In recent years , around 250 thousand Czech students signed a petition asking the Nobel Peace Prize for Winton , who has been nicknamed by media `` British Oskar Schindler '' .
His acts were not known to wide public until the late 1980s , when his wife found documents in their attic and shared them with an historian .
In Prague 's central railway station , there is a monument to children saved by Winton .
The Czech Republic celebrates its national holiday today .
On October 28 , 96 years ago , the former Czechoslovakia was founded as a country independent from former Habsburg Monarchy .
Yesterday , the incumbent Governor of California Edmund G. `` Jerry '' Brown won his fourth term to the governorship said the Associated Press -LRB- AP -RRB- , beating his Republican opponent Neel Kashkari with , according to unofficial results , 58.7 percent of the vote as of 4:43 a.m. local time -LRB- 0928 UTC -RRB- .
Lieutenant Governor Gavin Newsom also won a second term .
The Republican Party nominated Kashkari over Assemblyman Tim Donnelly , however , Kashkari lagged behind Brown in the polls by double digits .
Kashkari was expected to lose to Brown in this election .
Also on yesterday 's ballot was Proposition 47 which would reduce several felonies to misdemeanor status , reducing maximum sentences from three years to one .
AP reported Proposition 47 as having passed .
As of 1:28 a.m. , unofficial results said the proposition had 58.4 percent `` yes '' votes .
Brown 's father Edmund G. `` Pat '' Brown was governor for two terms before losing the governorship to later United States President Ronald Reagan .
Jerry Brown had previously won the gubernatorial election in 1974 , serving two terms from 1975 until 1983 , and served a third term after winning in 2010 .
The memorial was to take place on Tuesday at Al-Katiba square , to commemorate ten years since the founder and leader of the Fatah movement , Yasser Arafat , died .
However according to Zakaria al-Agha , senior Gaza Strip Fatah leader , Gaza security services ordered the stage workers for the event `` to stop working and leave '' .
Some Fatah officials blamed the wave of explosions on Hamas .
A Fatah spokesperson added they had been expecting the unity government `` to cater to the interests of our nation '' .
Hamas denied any connection to the events , and its spokesperson Sami Abu Zuhri condemned the attacks on his Facebook page .
Hamas Ministry of Interior spokesperson Iyad Al-Buzm said the memorial had been cancelled due to the tense atmosphere between the two movements following the attacks during the last few days , and due to technical reasons , including the delay in salary payments to security personnel by the unity government .
Furthermore , he said the prime minister of the unity government , Rami Hamdallah , had n't contacted security in the Gaza Strip .
In June 2014 , after an agreement between Hamas and Fatah , a reconciliation government was established .
This reconciliation was to have enabled the first memorial ceremony for Arafat in Gaza since Hamas took over the strip in 2007 .
For the past few months , however , recriminations between the two sides have marred the arrangement .
About two months ago , Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas accused Hamas of establishing a `` shadow government '' in the Gaza Strip .
Hamas workers accuse Fatah-dominated leadership of not paying their salaries .
The shot was his second of two free throw attempts .
Media photos showed University of Michigan coach John Beilen congratulating Hatch .
Hatch survived a plane crash and eight-week coma in 2011 , an accident that killed his father and step mother .
Hatch had previously survived a separate crash in 2003 , that killed his mother , brother and sister .
Hatch , raised in Fort Wayne , Indiana , moved in 2013 to his uncle 's home in California .
Of the tragedies , Hatch told reporters , `` Obviously , it 's a big part of my life , but I 'm about moving forward and making the most of my experience here . ''
Scientists from the European Space Agency -LRB- ESA -RRB- announced yesterday the Philae space probe , as part of the Rosetta mission , has landed on a comet called Comet 67P/Churyumov -- Gerasimenko .
It is the first time ever a controlled landing has been made on a comet .
Scientists say the anchors that hold the probe on the comet 's surface malfunctioned and they are investigating this .
Although the anchors malfunctioned , many have treated the mission as a success .
The purpose of the Rosetta mission is to learn how a comet works and to investigate the origins of planets .
Scientists plan on gathering data on the comet from the probe for about a year .
Comets may possibly have been a source of water delivery to the earth along with organic matter that can form proteins and support life .
Scientists hope to understand how planets form , especially how the Earth formed , since comets collided with the Earth long ago .
Police alleged Alneisha Butler originated a scheme to lure a 25-year-old man to an apartment complex in Tyler late Tuesday night , where he was accosted at gun point by four men .
Butler and the man had been corresponding online for a few weeks , when she told him she wanted him to meet some friends of hers , according to police .
When the two met at the complex , they were met by the four men who demanded money from the victim .
He did n't have cash , so the assailants ordered him to get cash from an ATM -LRB- Automated Teller Machine -RRB- while they held the woman until his return .
The man left the scene and notified police by phone .
The men named as alleged assailants in the crime were Lawrence Caston , Shannon Howard , Justin McGee , and David Roberts .
The woman and each of the four men were being held on a US$ 750,000 bond .
A police spokesperson cautioned , `` This could have -LSB- just as -RSB- easily happened if he met her at a bar as it happened online .
Yesterday evening saw the Usher Hall in Edinburgh host a meeting between representatives of the City of Edinburgh Council -LRB- CEC -RRB- and the local rock and pop music scene .
The meeting was dominated with local musicians ' complaints over the `` zero tolerance '' policy Edinburgh is viewed as having adopted towards amplified music .
The meeting began with the leading panel -- Norma Austin Hart , vice-convener for Culture and Sport ; John Stout , promoter from Regular Music ; Kevin Buckle , of local store Avalanche Records ; and Karl Chapman , manager of the Usher Hall -- introducing themselves and outlining the purpose of the meeting .
Coming in for the lion 's share of criticism , staff from CEC 's Licensing Board were visibly uncomfortable when the topic of the `` single complainant '' was brought up time and time again .
That responsibility is bundled with the alcohol license , which leaves publicans fearful that their premises will be forced to close if they do not comply with demands to cease use of any amplification , or hosting live music .
This was characterised as a ` tyranny of the minority ' , a most-undemocratic approach where one person -- for example , recently moved into a property adjacent to a long-established premises hosting live music -- could force the closure of a business which has hosted local talent for 30 + years .
Taking heed of the strength of feeling from the majority present , Councillor Hart made a number of personal commitments towards the end of the meeting .
Those included setting up a working group , Music is Audible , to look at how the council could better work with venues , and to have a follow-up meeting in March next year .
The Spanish Benevolent Society announced on Tuesday a DVD edition of the film Little Spain , directed by Artur Balder , is now available on their official website .
The film , which summarizes a part of Hispanic immigration in the United States displaying the history of New York City -LRB- NYC -RRB- , is based upon a set of old photographs and testimonies showing a neighborhood called Little Spain in Manhattan , situated at the West End of 14th Street , in the time when it was densely populated by Spaniards and Hispanic immigrants .
Well into the 1960s Spanish was still commonly spoken on 14th Street .
The film also displays footage of the Santiago Apóstol festival , or St. James Day festival , which died out in the early 1990s as the remnants of the Hispanic community left that part of the city .
The film shows how Spain contributed to the vast wave of emigration of Europeans to the Americas which , in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century , transformed the three continents .
The Spaniards were a very small proportion of US immigration compared to some of the other national or ethnic groups of immigrants that came to the United States , such as Italian , Irish , and Polish .
Australian cricketer Phillip Hughes has died in St Vincent 's Hospital , Sydney today -LRB- Thursday , local time -RRB- .
Hughes was playing a Sheffield Shield match for South Australia at the Sydney Cricket Ground when he was struck in the neck by a bouncer .
Thoughts go out to Phillip Hughes ' family and friends .
#RIPPhillipHughes , '' Australian women 's captain Meg Lanning tweeted .
Today was meant to be the third day of the Sheffield Shield match Hughes was involved in .
The entire round of matches was abandoned after the incident .
The Parliament of Finland has voted 105 to 92 today to approve a citizen 's initiative to legalise same-sex marriage .
The law now makes marriage gender-neutral and extends adoption rights and the right to use the same surname to same-sex couples .
Prime Minister Alexander Stubb supported the change to the law .
Before the vote , he wrote : `` Finland should strive to become a society where discrimination does not exist , human rights are respected and two adults can marry regardless of their sexual orientation . ''
Following the vote , Stubb said he was `` sincerely happy that marriage equality , gender equality and human rights prevailed in this issue . ''
Timo Soini from the nationalist opposition Finns Party commented : `` For me marriage will remain a union between a man and a woman .
-LSB- ... -RSB- This will be the first time we make it normal for children to be removed from their biological roots . ''
Soini suggested that if his party were to form the next government , it is unlikely they would make same-sex marriage a priority .
`` I would say that in government formation talks we would focus on the Finnish economy and employment .
These kinds of issues would hardly be on the table , '' said Soini .
In contrast , Archbishop Kari Mäkinen from the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland welcomed the change : `` I know how much this day means to the rainbow community , their loved ones and many others .
Archbishop Mäkinen had previously stated : `` If the initiative is passed , no one 's marriage will lose any of its value , nor will the position of a single child be endangered .
Changes in attitudes have taken place and continue to take place . ''
Outside of the Parliament , supporters of same-sex marriage and opponents both turned up to demonstrate , although the former outnumbered the latter .
Finland now becomes the 12th country in Europe to allow same-sex marriages , although the law is not going to take effect immediately .
The country has had a registered partnerships law for same-sex couples since 2002 .
An announcement is expected `` in the next few days '' .
Buenos Aires , Argentina -- Wikinews interviewed the Wikimedia Foundation 's Asaf Bartov , the Head of Wikimedia Grants Program and Global South Partnerships , at the Fourth Ibercoop -- Ibero-American Wikimedia Summit ; where , hosted by Wikimedia Argentina , a cooperative group of wiki contributors and supporters from Spain , Portugal , and Latin America met to foster collaboration and experience sharing related to the Wikimedia Foundation movement in these countries .
The Wikimedia Foundation is a US non-profit and charitable organization , that encourage Wikipedia readers to become contributors and editors of the Internet encyclopedia that ranks in the top-ten most-visited websites worldwide ,
Asaf Bartov : So , the Wikimedia Foundation supports Iberoconf because we see value in having Wikimedians with a shared culture , mostly shared language , get together and be able to share experiences and form collaborative plans in their own language .
This is support that Iberocoop gets and all other Wikimedians can get .
There are very few groups other than the Ibero-American group that share a language and ability to communicate in that way .
Even though we live in the 21st century , the world is digital and technological , and theoretically we could do a lot of communication on video-calls , etc. , and we can , the truth of the matter is that a lot of people feel distant from the Foundation , hesitant to approach , even though we are very welcoming and friendly I hope , a lot of people need to see us and talk to us , and have dinner with us , before they feel comfortable approaching us with issues and problems and things , and so there is value just in the social aspect which is being here , and being accessible , and being human .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Both of them also speak Spanish so they can contribute more freely and have delivered presentations on their topics of expertise .
Everything is running smoothly as far as I can tell .
I like that they are working ... they are not just doing , you know , the Wikipedia education program -- going to classrooms , having students write articles -- but they are collaborating with other external non-Wikimedia organizations towards free culture and free knowledge .
So that they are not bound only by the volunteers you have but they also leverage the external part .
The program is running according to schedule more or less .
More generally , I really appreciate their successful transition with the new Executive Director , who has been able to assume all of the responsibilities , including , crucially , their submission to the FDC -LSB- Funds Dissemination Committee -RSB- process like their proposal which was good as we have just learned this weekend when the FDC published its recommendations which are granting Wikimedia Argentina practically the budget that they requested .
Most specifically , I would say Wikimedia Argentina has some interesting partnerships , these educational partnerships that we have heard about yesterday are promising .
What should Costa Rica learn from Iberocoop to reach the same degrees of success that have reached the rest of the chapters ?
It would be interesting to learn from all our colleagues here what that moment was for them , if they can think of one , and then see if some of those stories may be relevant for Costa Rica .
Maybe there is something you can do , maybe something you can think about .
Other than that , there 's just the general solutions for all in our movement : trying to have regular meet-ups , trying to collaborate with allies groups like free software groups .
These are more generally solutions , but specifically to learn from Iberocoop I would ask people to think about their early stages and see if they can offer you some advice .
Think about the session we 've just had -LSB- ... -RSB- -- that was a complex conversation to have with no preparation , this was n't discussed for a lot of weeks in advance or something , and even the size we already have now was too big ; we were broken into groups , to come out with something and then try and mash it together , which was an effective way to do it .
And so two is a good balance between them , with at least two people , there are two tracks they can go to , have parallel sessions and bring the most value back to their community .
The one exception I can think of is for chapters that have staff to also include one staff member ; so , next year wherever we hold it , if it 's not in Argentina for example , I think it would make sense for two board members of Wikimedia Argentina to come and -LSB- one staff -RSB- .
NASA has finally accomplished its first spaceflight with the new Orion spacecraft , uncrewed , on Friday morning .
The spacecraft has now traveled farther from the Earth than any other spacecraft designed to carry a crew has traveled in over four decades .
The Orion crew module was launched off from Space Launch Complex 37 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida mounted on top of a United Launch Alliance Delta IV Heavy rocket .
Four and a half hours later , the space module landed in the Pacific Ocean .
During the mission , the spacecraft reached an altitude of 3,600 miles -LRB- 5800 kilometers -RRB- and experienced periods of intense radiation when traveling twice through the Van Allen belt .
Upon re-entry in the Earth 's atmosphere , Orion achieved speeds of 20,000 miles per hour -LRB- 32,000 kilometers per hour -RRB- and temperatures reached 4,000 degrees Fahrenheit -LRB- 2200 degrees Celsius -RRB- .
NASA has reported the entire spacecraft remained in one piece , with all the onboard computers still working despite the high radiation in the Van Allen belt .
All the parachutes deployed without incident .
A small jet has crashed in Gaithersburg , Maryland near Montgomery County Airpark yesterday at about 10:45 a.m. local time -LRB- 1545 UTC -RRB- , causing a house fire .
Officials said six people were killed in the accident -- three in the plane and three on the ground .
Montgomery County 's fire chief said all three people aboard the plane were killed in the crash .
In all , a total of three houses were damaged , according to the fire chief .
There were some residents in the damaged house who were not accounted for until about 4:30 p.m. when emergency personnel confirmed that three people inside the house were also killed .
Witnesses to the accident reported seeing the plane wobble a couple hundred feet above the ground and do a barrel roll .
The plane , identified as an Embraer EMB-500 / Phenom 100 , was apparently on approach to Montgomery County Airpark when it crashed .
According to the Federal Aviation Administration -LRB- FAA -RRB- , the plane was in line with runway 14 at the airport .
It was registered to an aviation company owned by one the victims , Michael Rosenberg -- Sage Aviation LLC based out of Chapel Hill , North Carolina -- according to authorities .
Rosenberg has been identified as the pilot in a different crash in March 2010 , but the FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board are still investigating the cause of yesterday 's incident .
The committee released an executive summary yesterday ahead of its full 6,000-page report .
The summary documented instances where detainees were kept awake for as long as a week and suggested that the agency had waterboarded more suspects than it previously disclosed .
The report also revealed that officials in the Bush administration were often told about these practices long after the fact .
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Secretary of State Colin Powell were not told of the CIA 's operations until a year after they had begun .
President Bush was briefed in 2006 , four years after the CIA commenced its `` Enhanced Interrogation Techniques '' program .
The released documents refutes the effectiveness of the program and the accuracy of the information gathered .
Previously , the Bush administration had defended its use , claiming that the intelligence garnered helped stop terrorist plots and capture al-Qaeda leadership , including Osama bin Laden .
The executive summary examines case studies from the CIA 's internal records which the committee says disputes those defenses .
CIA Director John O. Brennan acknowledged many of the failures outlined by the committee , but also rebuked it for what he called an `` incomplete and selective picture of what occurred . ''
Republican Senators have been critical of the report with Richard Burr calling it `` a fiction '' , and Marco Rubio stating that Senate Democrats published the report out of `` partisan joy '' with the intention of `` trying to embarrass people in the Bush administration . ''
On Monday , the Palestinian National Authority -LRB- PA -RRB- was granted the status of an Observer State in the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- in The Hague .
This decision promotes the PA toward permanent membership in the court , and helps establish the PA 's status in the international arena .
The organization operates under the Rome Statute , and is not part of the United Nations -LRB- UN -RRB- as such .
Palestinian Ambassador to the UN Riyad Mansour said that now , Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas needs to decide when to apply to be accepted as a full member .
This is another step for the PA toward exercising its threats to sue Israel for committing war crimes in its territory , following the armed conflict between the two sides in Gaza last summer .
PA Foreign Minister Riyad al-Maliki said there was `` no other option '' given the large numbers of civilian casualties .
Israelis have objected that move could lead to pressuring Israel during future negotiations , using the threat of a war crimes suit .
In November 2012 , the Palestinian Authority was accepted as an observing state without the right to vote in the UN , in a sweeping vote of the general assembly .
Subsequently , during the last few weeks , several European parliaments voted in favor of acknowledgement of a Palestinian state .
On its blog , Google , a U.S. headquartered multinational corporation specializing in Internet-related services and products , announced it would be shutting down the Spanish version of Google News , effective from December 16 of this year .
The shutdown came in direct response to amendments to the Spanish intellectual property law -- Ley De Propiedad Intelectual -- imposing a compulsory fee for the use of snippets of text to link to news articles , by online news aggregators that provide a search service .
The Spanish intellectual property law passed the Senate on October 15 , passed Congress on October 30 , and would take effect starting in January 2015 .
Spain made the right to payment inalienable , so that even the news organization quoted is not permitted to waive it .
Google News did not run ads on its news service , so did not profit directly , and said continuing to run the service would not be sustainable .
International copyright law preserves the right to make quotations without remuneration , the only such mandatory limitation to copyright .
In Germany publishers willingly forfeited their right to payment from Google , given how much traffic they would lose from not being indexed on Google News .
The Electronic Frontier Foundation -LRB- EFF -RRB- had expressed concerns that `` these ancillary copyright laws form part of a broader trend of derogation from the right to link . ''
They continued , `` This can be seen when you examine the other parts of the Spanish copyright amendments that take effect in January -LSB- ... -RSB- -- notably placing criminal liability on website operators who refuse to remove mere links to copyright-infringing material . ''
EFF quoted the recent introduction of the so-called `` right to be forgotten '' legislation allowing removal of entries from Google web search results .
Lamothe 's resignation had been recommended on Friday by a commission set up by President Michel Martelly .
Martelly appointed Lamothe in 2011 , the year after a major earthquake caused widespread devastation .
The Senate must approve amended electoral law before the votes can occur .
At least sixteen of the thirty Senate members must attend to make a quorum .
Only twenty places are presently filled , and six opposition members are refusing to attend .
The opposition accuses the government of unfairly favouring themselves with the amendments .
In response the government claims opposition politicians wish to delay the votes to retain their seats .
If votes are not in by January 12 the Senate will be reduced to a defunct ten members .
Lamothe told TV audiences `` I am leaving the post of prime minister this evening with a feeling of accomplishment .
The nation remains one of the poorest in the world but last year foreign investment was worth US$ 186 million -LRB- # 118 million ; $ 149 million -RRB- , a 20 % increase .
His social media savvy and multiple languages helped him develop a high profile at home and abroad .
He also attempted to simplify business startups , and campaigned with tourism minister Stephanie Villedrouin to improve Haiti 's image abroad .
He was Martelly 's third choice for Prime Minister , with Parliament rejecting his first two appointments .
Lamothe 's three-year term witnessed three cabinet reshuffles .
Protests over missed elections began in October , with citizens taking to the streets to demand Martelly and Lamothe both resign .
The sometimes violent protests have not abated despite Martelly forming the eleven-strong commission late last month to try and reach a resolution .
Martelly has already indicated he accepts the commission 's findings .
In the wake of Tuesday 's high-school attack by the Pakistani Taliban -LRB- TTK -RRB- on an army public school , Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif announced a three-day period of official mourning .
In addition to condemnation from world leaders -- who include UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , the President of the European Parliament Martin Schulz , and Deputy director David Griffiths of Amnesty International -- news agency Reuters are reporting the Afghan Taliban have also issued a statement condemning the attack .
The statement carried by Reuters , claiming to be from Taliban spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid , reads : `` The intentional killing of innocent people , children and women are against the basics of Islam and this criteria has to be considered by every Islamic party and government . ''
Tuesday 's attack on the Army Public School in Pakistan 's north-western city of Peshawar claimed the lives of 132 children , and nine staff from the school .
Official reports , following police and military action against the attackers , insist seven people took part in the school attack ; although a statement , issued by the TTK , insists there were only six , their targets being older pupils .
The attack began in the mid morning local time , with the assailants observed entering the compound wearing suicide vests .
Shortly thereafter , shots were heard with survivors reporting the gunmen were shooting people indiscriminately , going from classroom to classroom , killing teachers and students as they found them .
Turkey announced one day of national mourning .
Described as impossible to justify and `` blood-curdling '' by the UN Secretary-General , EU Parliamentary President Schulz labelled the attack `` abominable and cowardly -LSB- demonstrating -RSB- the inhuman attitude of the Taliban , their inhuman ideology , their remorseless fanaticism '' , and Indian Nobel Prize-winner Kailash Satyarthi , condemned the attackers as `` enemies of Allah '' and stated : `` The militants , be they Taliban or any other militants , who kill children , are the enemies of humanity .
A court in the Turkish capital Istanbul yesterday cleared exiled academic Pinar Selek of killing seven in a bomb attack in 1998 .
Forensic investigators blamed the explosion , which also injured 127 , in the city 's Spice Bazaar on an inadvertent gas leak .
Selek was arrested two days after the explosion .
Following exonerations in 2006 and 2008 she headed to Europe .
Initially travelling to Germany , Selek , now 43 , then headed to France .
Selek specialises in the Kurdish people .
In addition to the bombing , Selek was accused of aiding Kurdistan Workers ' Party -LRB- PKK -RRB- militancy .
She has been free since the 2000 publication of a report rejecting the bombing claim in favour of a gas leak .
Another acquittal came in 2011 .
That was set aside the following year and in January 2013 a conviction was substituted with a life sentence .
The sentence followed a conviction in which chief judge Vedat Yılmazabdurrahmanoğlu indicated he did not accept the evidence proved a bombing but was outvoted by two fellow judges .
Selek has also refused to identify to police rebels met in the course of research .
Defence lawyer Akın Atalay had submitted the evidence did not prove a bombing had occurred , and that the repeated prosecutions violate Turkish and international fair trial standards prohibiting double jeopardy .
He was countered by Istanbul public prosecutor Yılmaz Kıstı who earlier this month sought a new life sentence in the case .
The case has attracted supporters of Selek in Turkey and France .
They claim the prosecution is politically motivated to prevent her from conducting sociological research .
At the start of the appeal in April this year Turkish and French protestors gathered outside the Çağlayan Courthouse , waving banners demanding `` Justice for Pinar Selek '' .
Protestors were there on December 5 when the request for a new life sentence was made .
`` Pınar has resisted this ruthlessness , this injustice , by trying to live as fully as she can . ''
Also acquitted yesterday was Abdulmecit Ozturk .
The court said there was no `` exact and convincing '' evidence against the pair .
Selek has indicated a desire to return to Turkey with her name cleared .
`` We will be standing guard on her behalf until she returns here '' , Demriel promised at the December 5 protest .
The accident occurred at about 1430 UTC today , when the vehicle hit multiple pedestrians on Queen Street , then crashed into Millennium Hotel alongside George Square , located in the city centre .
BBC Scotland reporter Laura Bicker reported witness accounts the vehicle `` careered out of control '' and the driver `` slumped over the wheel '' when the crash occurred .
It is not yet clear how many people have been killed or injured , although Police Scotland have reported `` a number of fatalities and people injured '' , with `` all casualties , including the driver of the bin lorry '' , alternately being taken to Southern General Hospital , Western Infirmary and Glasgow Royal Infirmary .
They later said on Twitter at least six people have died and eight people are receiving hospital treatment .
Police Superintendent Stewart Carle said at least seven people suffered serious injury , although the total number of those injured may be greater than this .
Sky News has reported six fatalities and a larger number of people injured .
Superintendent Carle further explained that police will investigate what the force has described as a `` major incident '' for the rest of the day and overnight , although they do not suspect there was any `` sinister '' activity behind it .
They told the council to leave Christmas lights on to help the investigation ; the council had offered to switch them off as a mark of respect .
A winter wonderland attraction has been operating in the area this month .
Anyone with photos or video is asked to email the police at georgesquareincident@scotland.pnn.police.uk .
Another local woman said she is `` stunned '' and she had `` stood in that exact spot yesterday afternoon .
She was referring to a police helicopter that crashed into a Glasgow pub on November 29 last year .
On Sunday , Egypt opened the Rafah border crossing for two days , allowing many people , who had been waiting since it closed two months ago following a terror attack in the Sinai peninsula , to cross the border with the Gaza Strip in both directions .
On Monday , Egyptian authorities announced they were opening the border crossing for another day .
During the first two days , almost 1,000 people passed through the border crossing , about two thirds of them from the Gaza Strip to Egypt and a third in the opposite direction .
Gaza citizens who had been stuck in Egypt as they were unable to enter the Gaza Strip , were able to return home .
Director of Gaza Strip border corssings Maher Abu Sabha said those who crossed to the Egyptian side were people in need of medical treatment or who hold an overseas stay permit , only .
On October 24 , a car bomb detonated in northern Sinai , causing the death of 31 Egyptian security personnel and injuring 30 or more .
Following the attack and as part of the Egyptian authorities ' long-term fight against militant islamism in the Sinai peninsula , the Rafah border crossing was closed , and opened for only two days in late November .
Yesterday , a spokesperson for former U.S. Senator Jim Webb , a potential 2016 Democratic Party presidential candidate , attacked the Business Insider for its report Monday that Webb 's Political Action Committee -LRB- PAC -RRB- paid nearly US$ 100,000 -LRB- about $ 80,000 -RRB- to Webb 's wife and daughter over the course of the past six years .
Ashleigh Owens , who represents Webb 's Born Fighting PAC , accused the Business Insider of '' -LSB- a -RSB- dding up numbers across several years -LSB- to create -RSB- a sensational headline '' .
The controversy marks the first for Webb since he became the first major candidate to open an exploratory committee last month .
`` This story as written misrepresents reasonable compensation for real and provable work done '' , said Owens in a press release .
`` The activities of the PAC increased in 2014 when Jim Webb decided to re-enter the political discussions of our country . ''
According to Owens , in 2014 , Hong Le Webb , who works as an attorney , was paid for `` vetting design consultants , negotiating contracts and content management '' relating to the exploratory committee website .
Hogan was compensated for her work in the `` administration , management and design '' of websites as well as the `` handling of FEC -LSB- Federal Election Commission -RSB- compliance matters '' .
Webb , a 68-year-old Vietnam War veteran , served as Secretary of the Navy under President Ronald Reagan .
Webb favors less US intervention abroad , fewer free trade agreements , and supports gun rights .
According to National Interest editor Jacob Heilbrunn , Webb 's views on foreign policy and social issues may attract `` anti-war progressives as well as conservative-minded Southern white men . ''
The Nation labeled him the `` worst nightmare '' of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , who is widely expected to run for president in 2016 .
Hill served in Operation Desert Storm , flying about fifty combat missions .
In 2010 , he organized the `` Pilots and Patriots Defending the Constitution '' ahead of the that year 's midterm elections .
Hill ran his first campaign for president in 2012 , seeking the Republican nomination .
Former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney ultimately received the nomination and lost to incumbent president Barack Obama .
-LRB- -LRB- Hill -RRB- -RRB- I would like to bring People from the heartland of America that make this nation work .
We have had too many decades of Ivy League elites and Professors immersed in theory .
I believe it is our responsibility to pass on the same opportunities to future generations that were promised to us .
-LRB- -LRB- Christopher Hill -RRB- -RRB- My Presidential qualifications are rooted in my service as an Officer in the United States Air Force .
Politicians profess an Oath to this nation but once in office pursue their party agenda and reward their voters .
Why not run for a lower office that you would be more likely to win and effect change ?
The Air Force only selected 180 Officers a year from the Academy , Squadron Officer School and ROTC to attend .
Congress has proven itself ineffective as a body .
-LRB- -LRB- Hill -RRB- -RRB- President Obama has an agenda that represents the far left wing of his party .
His direction to Eric Holder to enforce some laws and not others is another example .
Implementing a Tax System that allows working Americans making under $ 250,000 to keep all of their money .
Representative John Boehner was re-elected as Speaker of the US House of Representatives on Tuesday despite a right-wing rebellion of 25 members .
Boehner 's appointment as Speaker passed with 216 of the 408 votes .
Republican Senator Mitch McConnell was also sworn in on Tuesday as the Senate majority leader , marking the first time in eight years when Republicans have controlled both the House and Senate .
One -- Brian Babin -- simply voted ` present ' while the remaining twenty four voted for a variety of other candidates .
Twelve voted for Representative Daniel Webster , three voted for Representative Louis Gohmert , two voted for Representative Ted Yoho , and two for Representative Jim Jordan .
Two of those voting against Boehner , Daniel Webster and Richard B. Nugent , were not reappointed to the House Rules Committee .
Speaking to reporters , Boehner said the House Republicans were `` going to have a family conversation , which we had this morning , about bringing our team together '' .
Following the election of Boehner and McConnell , the White House announced President Barack Obama would veto planned legislation by Republicans to start the construction of the Keystone XL oil pipeline .
White House press secretary Josh Earnest told reporters : `` If this bill passes this Congress , the president would n't sign it '' .
Space transport services company SpaceX launched their fifth Dragon resupply vehicle to the International Space Station yesterday .
The spacecraft -- containing more than 2,200 kg -LRB- 5,000 pounds -RRB- of food , experiments , and spare parts -- successfully decoupled from the launch rocket and should reach the station early tomorrow .
The launch was postponed from Tuesday because of a technical issue on the second stage of the rocket .
The shipment includes replacements for cargo aboard the spaceship Cygnus , destroyed during a failed launch in October .
Cygnus belonged to the rival Orbital Sciences Corporation .
SpaceX tried unsuccessfully to land the Falcon 9 delivery rocket for reuse .
The rocket reached an unmanned barge in the Atlantic , but landed too hard .
SpaceX CEO Elon Musk said the landing `` bodes well for the future , though '' .
The attempted salvage of the rocket was experimental , using new retractable fins .
Next time they will add extra hydraulic fluid , Musk said .
The ship 's support equipment was damaged but , according to Musk , the barge is intact .
Mangala Samaraweera , aide to the new president , said yesterday at a press conference : `` People think it was a peaceful transition .
He went on to say `` The first thing the new cabinet will investigate is the coup and conspiracy by President Rajapaksa '' .
Samaraweera also said the coup was unsuccessful due to the military not cooperating , saying the president `` stepped down only when the army chief and the police inspector general refused to go along with him . ''
Samaraweera alleged Rajapaksa wanted to deploy soldiers and police to halt vote counting after early results suggested he was unlikely to win the election .
Rajapaksa has strongly denied the allegations and Rajapaksa 's media secretary Wijayananda Herat claimed the consultation with police and military leaders was only to instruct them to tighten the country 's security measures .
Ruwan Wanigasooriya , a spokesman for the country 's military , told Agence France-Presse no attempted coup had come to his attention .
Sirisena also vowed to take on corruption in government : `` I will take all the steps to eliminate corruption , loopholes , and bribes completely from this country '' .
Rajitha Senaratne , a member of the Sri Lankan Parliament who acted as a spokesman for Sirisena , also addressed the topic of press freedom during the election campaign , saying the government would investigate the killing of journalists and phone tapping would no longer occur .
Following the shootings at the offices of Charlie Hebdo , millions of people turned out yesterday for marches in Paris , in cities across France , and around the world .
Reported estimates of between 1.5 and 2 million people rallied in Paris , and the French interior ministry estimated 3.7 million or more rallied across France .
White House Spokesman Josh Earnest responded to criticism for not sending a higher level representative on behalf of the United States : `` It is fair to say we should have sent someone with a higher profile . ''
Earnest said the rally had been planned on Friday and President Obama attending the rally on such short notice presented `` significant security challenges '' .
Charlie Hebdo has previously published cartoons featuring the Islamic prophet Muhammed .
A Sheriff in Aberdeen yesterday jailed gamekeeper George Mutch for crimes against birds of prey .
It is believed to be the first time anybody has been imprisoned for raptor persecution in Scotland .
Mutch , 48 , killed a protected goshawk , and used illegal traps to capture a buzzard and a second goshawk .
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds -LRB- RSPB -RRB- used hidden cameras to record Mutch 's crimes , one of the first times such footage has featured in a Scottish wildlife trial .
The video shows Mutch remove a juvenile goshawk from one trap and beat it to death with a stick .
Sheriff Noel McPartlin called Mutch 's conduct `` a determined course of action .
Sara Shaw , Scotland 's procurator fiscal -LRB- prosecutor -RRB- for wildlife crime , explained `` Goshawks in particular are rare birds : the court heard evidence in this case that there are only about 150 nesting pairs in Scotland . ''
She said the law was there `` to preserve Scotland 's natural heritage , including the wildlife that forms part of it . ''
David McKie , defending , detailed other sanctions his client had already suffered .
His employers on the Kildrummy Estate have suspended him , and police have seized his guns ; he may lose his gun licence because of his conviction .
The Scottish Gamekeepers Association separately announced Mutch 's expulsion from the group 's ranks .
RSPB Scotland 's Duncan Orr-Ewing called the sentence a `` historic , landmark result '' and `` a turning point , sending a clear message to those determined to flout our laws '' .
Landowners ' body Scottish Land and Estates also had no sympathy : `` The illegal killing of any bird of prey is unacceptable and anyone who engages in such activity can , rightly , expect to feel the full weight of the law . ''
The RSPB said it may be the first such jailing anywhere in the UK .
The group said other wildlife crimes , such as against badgers , had previously attracted prison terms .
`` We would like to thank the Crown Office and Police Scotland for helping to bring this case to a successful conviction , as well as the exemplary work of the RSPB Scotland investigations team '' said Orr-Ewing .
He added `` Wildlife criminals must expect no sympathy from now on . ''
However , the bird does face persecution and nest robbing by humans .
Indirect human impacts include deforestation and , according to a 2012 study , wind farm developments .
Scotland has invested heavily in wind power over the last decade .
On that day reportedly thirteen people on a bus were killed and sixteen wounded when separatists struck the bus with a Grad missile launcher near a Ukrainian checkpoint .
During the march in Kyiv President Poroshenko promised to return Donbass to Ukraine , while participants in Lutsk and Khmelnytsky requested the Goverment to recognise Donetsk People 's Republic and Luhansk People 's Republic as terrorist organisations officially .
Mayor of Kiev Vitali Klitschko said , `` Here are those , who are disturbed with a problem of terrorism .
Those who want to stop this evil . ''
The march ended with a public prayer for victims of terror .
The Major Archbishop of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church Sviatoslav Shevchuk and the Patriarch of Kyiv and All Rus ' - Ukraine Filaret , as well as representatives of Ukrainian Orthodox Church , Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church , Clerical Board of Ukraine 's Muslims , Armenian Apostolic Church took part in this prayer .
Democrat Tom Wolf was inaugurated yesterday as the 47th Governor of the U.S. commonwealth of Pennsylvania .
The inauguration took place in front of the Pennsylvania State Capitol in Harrisburg .
Wolf , 66 , and his running mate , newly sworn-in Lieutenant Governor Mike Stack , defeated Corbett and former Lieutenant Governor Jim Cawley by nearly ten percentage points in last November 's general election .
As a result , Corbett became the first Pennsylvania Governor in modern times to lose a re-election bid .
In his inaugural address to a crowd of roughly 4,000 , Wolf focused on his belief in the need for change , labeling himself an `` unconventional '' and `` different kind of governor . ''
He touched on a number of issues including education , over which he and Corbett clashed during last year 's campaign , in addition to the economy and government reform .
`` As your Governor , I will do everything in my power to make Pennsylvania a place where jobs pay , schools teach , government works ... and where all Pennsylvanians can believe in the fundamental notion that our democracy still works '' , Wolf said .
`` Because I know that if we come together with a sense of shared purpose , we can build the better future that Pennsylvania deserves . ''
He is slated to propose his first budget to the Pennsylvania General Assembly on March 3 for the fiscal year beginning July 1 .
Following the attack on the priests , town council workers were forced to evacuate as their building came under assault and was set fire to .
A local report , not been independently verified , alleged a council worker was killed during the incident .
Police intervened to arrest a number of the local villagers involved in the attacks but were met with hostility from those trying to stop the arrested being taken away .
Such incidents have been noted by the World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- .
A recent WHO report said `` community resistance '' is a `` major barrier to control '' in the countries Ebola has worst hit .
Forécariah has seen incidents like this before .
In one incident , on September 23 , two Red Cross volunteers buried an Ebola victim , and were then attacked .
Villagers removed the corpse from the grave and hid it .
This attack had undone `` weeks of persistent and effective efforts to slow the outbreak '' according to the WHO , who were overseeing the team .
In 2013 it was discovered he had a tumour on his gallbladder .
Saito won consecutive Olympic gold medals at the 1984 games in Los Angeles and the 1988 games in Seoul , South Korea .
His victory in the Seoul games continued the record of Japan winning a gold in Judo in every Olympic games since the 1964 games , held in Toyko .
Yasuhiro Yamashita , a fellow Judoka who fought Saito in three consecutive All-Japan judo championship finals , and who also won gold at the 1984 games , commented on his death , `` He was my lifetime rival .
Yamashita won all three finals against Saito .
A tribute came from Tsunekazu Takeda , the President of the Japanese Olympic Committee .
Saito retired in 1989 .
They said the system dates roughly to the formation of the Milky Way galaxy .
They found the planets orbiting around Kepler-444 , about 117 light years from Earth .
Researchers investigated Kepler-444 with NASA 's Kepler telescope using a method called astroseismology .
According to Daniel Huber , part of the research team at the University of Sydney , it takes under ten days for these five planets to orbit the star and all of them are too close to it to sustain life .
Conductor Israel Yinon died yesterday after collapsing during a performance in Switzerland .
The Israeli conductor was directing an orchestra in the city of Lucerne when he suddenly collapsed and fell head first off of the platform .
Yinon collapsed during the performance of German composer Richard Strauss 's An Alpine Symphony .
An audience member attended to him while others were asked to leave the Lucerne Culture and Convention Centre and musicians exited .
Yinon 's girlfriend was playing in the orchestra when he collapsed .
Yinnon was known for showcasing the works of composers killed in the Holocaust .
Speaking to the Ynet news website his cousin Yisrael Ganor said `` In Germany , Austria , and the Czech Republic he was very successful with this material , whereas in Israel he was rarely invited -LSB- to conduct -RSB- .
Once someone famous told him -- I do n't remember if it was a musician or journalist -- that they would only invite him if there was no one else , or if the budgetary constraints could n't cover someone well known . ''
Tributes have been paid to the conductor including one from the Jungen Philharmonie Zentralschweiz student orchestra .
They said they lost `` not only a highly regarded musical colleague and sensitive educator , but a big-hearted friend . ''
An explosion on Thursday morning destroyed a state maternity hospital in Mexico City , Mexico .
Initially reports placed the fatalities at seven .
Local officials including Mexico City Health Secretary Armando Ahued and Mayor Miguel Angel Mancera have since revised the figure downwards .
Over 70 people including 20 infants are wounded .
The explosion occurred as a truck was resupplying the hospital 's gas tanks , and a leak developed in the supply hose .
Chavez and Alatorre spent around fifteen minutes attempting to stem the leak , to no avail .
Firefighters and federal police entered the ruins to recover trapped survivors .
Victims ' relatives , and other bystanders , gathered at police cordons around the scene .
It was a nightmare , '' said nurse Ivonne Lugo Durantes .
Durantes was rescued after ten minutes trapped beneath debris .
She witnessed other staff rescuing babies amid a conflagration .
New father Jose Eduardo told reporters his wife ran barefoot with their baby to escape .
Eduardo said some escaped nude .
Witnesses around the hospital reported a strong smell of gas , a large explosion , and flying debris .
Ambulances and helicopters were used to evacuate casualties .
A megamouth shark was found dead in the Philippines on Wednesday .
There have been only fifteen confirmed sightings in the nation and around 60 worldwide .
The fifteen-foot male was found after reportedly becoming entangled with a fishing net near the Barangay Marigondon neighborhood of Pio Duran , Albay province .
Its body was encased with ice pending a necropsy .
Locals have nicknamed the dead shark ` toothless ' , a How to Train Your Dragon movie reference .
Megamouths reach up to eighteen feet .
Their name refers to its large head and mouth , used to filter plankton and other small food from the ocean .
Occasionally the prey of other sharks and whales , megamouths are thought to live in the Pacific around Taiwan , the Philippines , and Japan based on previous sightings .
The first such shark identified was accidentally discovered by the US Navy off the coast of Hawaii when it became stuck in a ship 's anchor .
Researchers theorise a white strip on the shark 's head illuminates to attract prey .
A fire Friday night and Saturday morning caused major damage to the Institute of Scientific Information on Social Sciences in Moscow , Russia .
Russia Today said 147 personnel battled the blaze with 38 vehicles .
The blaze left no injuries and was contained by around midnight .
Thought to have escaped the fire are the library 's collection of rare and ancient Slavic manuscripts .
Other documents housed include Russia 's largest repository of articles from the United Nations and UNESCO in particular , and UN precursor the League of Nations .
Founded in 1918 and boasting 49,000 readers served by 330 staff , the library has lost around 2,000 square metres .
The roof has partially collapsed .
Arson has been ruled out with an official telling Ria Novosti an electrical fault is considered likely .
Richard von Weizsäcker , the President who oversaw German reunification in 1990 , was announced to have died yesterday .
von Weizsäcker served as a Nazi soldier during World War II , earning promotions and an Iron Cross .
He would later describe Germany 's defeat as a liberation and encouraged his countrymen to acknowledge their collective past , including the Holocaust .
He joined the Christian Democratic Union and served as mayor of West Berlin before his 1984 election as President .
`` All of us , whether guilty or not , whether young or old , must accept the past .
We are all affected by its consequences and liable for it .
Anyone who closes his eyes to the past is blind to the present . ''
He also said Allied forces `` freed us all from the system of National Socialist tyranny . ''
Born in Stuttgart in 1920 , von Weizsäcker oversaw reunification of West and East Germany in 1990 , eleven months after the Berlin Wall fell .
In 1989 he was reelected unopposed .
In 1986 he became the first German to address the UK parliament .
With his father Ernst a defendant at the Nuremberg trials , Richard von Weizsäcker appeared before the court as a lawyer for his father 's defence .
Connecticut murder convict Robert Courchesne , who had a death sentence overturned by the state Supreme Court , collapsed in prison yesterday .
Courchesne , now 57 , stabbed heavily pregnant Demetris Rodgers to death in 1998 .
In 2004 he was convicted of her murder and that of her unborn baby , delivered minutes after the murder by cesarean section .
Baby Antonia Rodgers spent over a month on life support before death was confirmed .
Using legislation that provided the death penalty to multiple murderers the court sentenced Courchesne to death .
Courchesne reached the Connecticut Supreme Court in 2010 and had the Antonia murder conviction overturned .
The court ruled it was not proved the baby was alive at the time of the cesarean delivery .
The death penalty was substituted with a 60-year sentence which prosecutors accepted instead of opting for a retrial .
Yesterday 's death at Danbury Hospital is being probed by police and prison officials , but is not considered suspicious .
Courchesne collapsed while walking in the Garner Correctional Center , Newtown at around 10:35 a.m. local time .
A Scottish university is investigating after several dozen members of its football club reportedly used blackface as part of costuming for a social event yesterday .
Representatives from the University of Stirling , located in central Scotland , has said it has `` zero-tolerance '' for racism and is `` disappointed that the actions of a few are tarnishing the -LSB- university 's -RSB- reputation '' .
Stirling University F.C. yesterday tweeted about its intention to hold what it called an `` African cup of nations '' themed event that evening , although the tweet was later deleted .
That evening , a group of people said to be from the team reportedly arrived at Cape , a bar in Stirling , wearing football kits , their faces and limbs covered black .
Website The Tab accompanies its report with pictures of several men who appear to be covered in black makeup and quotes one man , Jim MacIvor , describing witnessing `` 30 -- 40 blacked up footballers having a drink '' , socialising , `` being quite boisterous -LSB- ... -RSB- -LSB- and -RSB- quite drunk -- and some of them were taking their tops off and stuff like that . ''
The website also shared video of members of the public confronting some of the men in the group and accusing them of racism .
The Tab , which in publicising its article described the incident as `` so cringe '' , has prompted debate among Facebook users as to whether or not the football club members ' actions amount to racism .
A spokesperson for Show Racism the Red Card , a charity advocating for anti-racism education , said : `` The practice of blacking up was usually as part of a show by white entertainers for white audiences which relied on mocking black people 's skin colour and culture ; the practice is racist and should definitely be avoided in our more enlightened times . ''
Previously , the same charity has said `` it is the consequences of the practice rather than the intention that is relevant ; what does black-face say to people , and young people particularly about the acceptance and normality of different skin colours in society ?
Show Racism the Red Card would argue that these practices caricature and exoticise differences which could lead to discrimination . ''
The university has suspended four of its football teams from any football-related activities as the investigation continues .
In a joint statement , Professor John Gardner , Deputy Principal for Education and Students , and student union president Amy McDermott , said the university is investigating the incident .
`` The university and the Students ' Union have a zero-tolerance approach to racism and will respond robustly to any behaviour that does not meet with our values and expectations '' , their statement said .
`` We are committed to promoting equality and diversity so that all students , staff and members of society can be confident that they will be treated with dignity and respect .
We promote equality and diversity through a variety of policies and initiatives , including the ` One Stirling ' campaign , which outlines our commitment to these values .
We are disappointed that the actions of a few are tarnishing the reputation of the University of Stirling , and we wish to reassure students that a full investigation is underway and disciplinary action will be taken against any student found to have engaged in racist behaviour . ''
`` This is one of the most disgusting crimes I have ever investigated and I find it hard to believe someone could stoop so low to commit such a horrific offence , '' said detective Sergeant Neil Lawless .
`` This man has taken what he sees as an easy opportunity by stealing a purse from a dying woman .
I am sure the community will be equally disgusted and I appeal to anyone who may have seen this man take the purse and walk off on Leigh Road .
There are a number of rumours circulating on social media at the moment but I would like to reassure residents we are doing all we can to find out who is responsible . ''
Meanwhile , website Wigan Today has claimed witnesses and an unnamed Greater Manchester Police source informed it some nearby pedestrians took pictures of her body following the crash , although the official police statement does not directly address these claims .
Sergeant Lawless has asked members of the public to contact police with any information that may be relevant to the investigation .
Greater Manchester Police describe the thief as white , of medium build , aged between 30 and 40 , and six feet in height .
The police force say he `` had a dark brown beard , -LSB- and -RSB- wore a light grey hooded top with the hood pulled over his head , light blue jeans and black boot style training shoes . ''
There were 58 on board when TransAsia Airways Flight 235 crashed into the city 's Keelung River .
Fifteen survived and three more remain missing .
Tzu Chi Foundation volunteer Lee Hung Shu-ying said today cold weather meant the families of the missing believe their loved ones are dead .
They have been credited with reducing the death toll .
Their bodies were found in the cockpit , with leg fractures .
Both were still holding the wrecked plane 's controls .
The plane was in the air for minutes before banking steeply , hitting an elevated road , and crashing into the river .
The domestic flight from Taipei Songshan Airport was headed to the island of Kinmen .
Investigators are focusing on the ATR 72-600 's engines .
Feathering involves the turboprop 's propeller rotating its blades to reduce drag .
By reducing drag on the non-working engine , a twin turboprop plane can fly safely using only its other engine .
A feathered engine will not provide any thrust .
The reason for autofeathering is presently unclear ; what is known is the flight crew subsequently shut off the wrong engine .
A series of stall warnings went off in the cockpit as the aircraft headed to disaster .
Aviation Safety Council managing director Thomas Wang confirmed an automated `` number two engine flameout '' message should have alerted the crew to the engine trouble , leading them to follow `` the corresponding checklist '' .
`` There are procedures that pilots go through -- safeguards -- when you 're going to shut down an engine , particularly close to the ground , '' said John M. Cox , former commercial pilot and boss of a safety consultant .
Stephen Fredrick , a former pilot of similar aircraft , told CNN video showing the final seconds is consistent with dual flameout .
He said the wings-level , nose-down position suggested gliding .
Wang , however , cautions it is too early to blame any particular factor .
`` At this moment we just release the numbers , the parameter we 've confirmed , we did not release any judgment who did what at this time '' .
The Aviation Safety Council has teamed up with engine manufacturer Pratt & Whitney Canada to examine the engines .
Local prosecutors are investigating potential `` professional error '' , and the Civil Aeronautics Administration has ordered TransAsia retest all ATR pilots .
90 flights over three days are cancelled to allow the proficiency checks .
TransAsia and Uni Air have also been ordered to check their collective 22 ATRs for engine and fuel system problems .
Pilot Liao Chien-tsung and his co-pilot , not publicly identified , were initially hailed as heroes by prosecutors , mayor Ko Wen-je , international press , and at least one relative of a survivor .
After declaring `` Mayday Mayday , engine flameout '' to air traffic control the pair grappled with their struggling plane , avoiding buildings in its path .
Niki Quasney , who together with wife Amy Sandler became the first married gay couple in Indiana , died of cancer on Thursday .
The death was announced today by the law firm that assisted her .
Indiana , US had only recognised their marriage last year after a federal judge granted their emergency request .
Quasney was diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 2009 and sought the intervention to ensure eligibility for her daughters and wife to receive state and national assistance after her death .
Also sought was a death certificate recognising her marriage .
The same judge ultimately struck down the state gay marriage ban .
An appeals court in Chicago upheld the decision , as did the national Supreme Court .
The case was one of a national slew following an earlier Supreme Court ruling in favor of gay marriage .
`` If my life is cut short because of ovarian cancer , '' Quasney told one court `` I want our children to know that their parents were treated like other married couples in their home state , and to be proud of this .
Their lawyer Paul Castillo said today the couple `` knew that by coming forward they could help accelerate equality for all same-sex couples in Indiana by demonstrating the urgency of their need for equal dignity . ''
Four people have died and at least four more have been seriously injured after a dump truck hit multiple vehicles and two pedestrians in Bath in South West England .
The incident occurred at around 1600 UTC yesterday when the truck rolled down a hill on Lansdown Lane in the city 's Upper Weston district in what witness accounts given to police suggest was an accident avoidance attempt .
The four fatalities died at the scene of the crash , on a steep hill close to Weston All Saints Primary School .
Three people injured were taken to Royal United Hospital in Bath ; one was critically injured and transported to Bristol 's Southmead Hospital by air ambulance .
A number of others also received minor injuries , leading to the primary school being turned into a temporary hospital .
Eyewitness accounts reported by ITV News West Country indicated the truck driver repeatedly beeped his horn in the seconds before the collision , at a time when a number of children would have been leaving the school .
Police closed off the road to allow for investigative work .
Speaking on behalf of Avon and Somerset Constabulary , Chief Superintendent Caroline Peters , who described the collision scene as `` one of carnage '' , explained : `` We have a collision team of investigators who are trying to assess the cause of this accident and we are working very closely with the fire service and South West Ambulance '' .
The Dhruv caught fire after going down in a forest in Bandipora .
Search and rescue personnel reached the wreckage in the Laman/Safapora forest at around 9:00 p.m.
`` There was a huge noise which was followed by smoke and flames , '' according to witnesses .
Rescuers were due to check for further victims .
Manufactured by PSU Hindustan Aeronautics in India , more than 140 Dhruvs are in service nationally .
They have suffered a string of setbacks , with four previous crashes across the country since 2011 killing a total of fourteen .
The army says their weight is too high and their engines too underpowered for some roles .
Ecuador has seven Dhruvs which are on reduced duties following accidents .
The Dominican Republic and Haiti between them make up the island of Hispaniola and Dominicans have grown concerned by Haitian immigration in recent years .
Police say they believe the man , known to his friends as Tulile , was murdered during a robbery .
Police officers anonymously told reporters a winning lottery ticket may have been the motive .
This week saw the public burning of Haiti 's flag in Santiago by local residents , saying it symbolised their rejection of Haitian immigration .
The issue is a hot topic , with a court ruling two years ago retrospectively stripping Dominicans born to unregistered Haitian parents from 1930 onwards of their citizenship .
Only 7,000 of an estimated 200,000 eligible residents have signed up for residency cards , a scheme instigated by the government in the face of international pressure .
The deadline to apply for the permits , which allow citizenship after two years , has passed .
`` They should n't have to apply for residency , '' said Santiago Canton of the Robert F Kennedy Center for Human Rights in a Guardian interview .
Canton said the murder should be viewed `` in the context of constant discrimination and violence against Haitians '' .
The team analysed suicide records for over 1,500 people from Salt Lake County , Utah from 2000 through 2010 .
Comparing to air pollution exposure in the three days prior to death the scientists noticed an increase of 20 % for deaths amongst those exposed to high nitrogen dioxide .
For men , the rates when exposed to nitrogen dioxide were 25 % higher than average .
Middle-aged men were particularly affected .
The scientists believe air pollution combines with other factors to increase suicides , rather than triggering them itself .
Doctor Amanda Bakian , one of the researchers , said `` As suicide risk was found to differ by age and gender , this suggests that vulnerability to suicide following air pollution exposure is not uniform across Salt Lake County residents and that some Salt Lake County residents are more vulnerable than others . ''
Police in Denmark have shot dead a man they believe was responsible for two gun attacks that killed two people in Copenhagen yesterday .
Police had kept a property in the Nørrebro district of the city under surveillance .
When the man returned to the property , they confronted him and shot him in the ensuing fire fight .
The first shooting took place in a café at the Krudttoenden cultural center which was hosting a discussion about blasphemy and free speech , relating to the attacks on the Charlie Hebdo magazine in Paris .
Swedish artist Lars Vilks , who organised the meeting , was subjected to death threats following publication of a number of drawings of the Prophet Muhammad .
Vilks ' website says the event was timed to coincide with the fatwa placed on the British novelist Salman Rushdie .
The event also hosted Inna Shevchenko , an activist with the feminist protest group FEMEN .
François Zimeray , France 's ambassador to Denmark , attended the event .
He told reporters : `` They shot from the outside -LSB- and -RSB- had the same intention as Charlie Hebdo , only they did n't manage to get in -LSB- ... -RSB- Intuitively I would say there were at least 50 gunshots , and the police here are saying 200 .
Bullets went through the doors and everyone threw themselves to the floor . ''
The second attack yesterday took place outside a synagogue in the Krystalgade area of Copenhagen .
The attacker shot and killed , according to the local Jewish community , Dan Uzan , a 37-year-old Jewish man who was volunteering as a security guard outside the synagogue while a bat mitzvah service was held inside .
Following the attacks , police released a description and photo of the suspect : he was depicted wearing a black puffer jacket , carrying a black bag , wearing a maroon balaclava , aged between 25 and 30 with a black automatic weapon .
The chief police inspector Torben Molgaard Jensen told reporters : `` We assume that it 's the same culprit behind both incidents . ''
Lars Vilks in a statement to Associated Press said he believed the first attack was directed at him : `` What other motive could there be ?
World leaders have condemned the shooting .
French President François Hollande described the attacks as `` deplorable '' and promised the Danish `` full solidarity of France in this trial '' .
British Prime Minister David Cameron tweeted : `` I condemn the shootings in Copenhagen .
Free speech must always be protected . ''
British Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said : `` Sickened by shooting at free speech event in Copenhagen .
Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott said the Australian government `` condemns the shooting at a free speech event in Copenhagen overnight '' and '' -LSB- t -RSB- he thoughts of all Australians are with the people of Denmark and , in particular , the family of the victim who lost his life and the police officers injured in this brutal act of terror .
We stand with the people and government of Denmark in confronting this cynical attempt to undermine that fundamental right . ''
Meeting with the Israeli Cabinet , Netanyahu said : `` Jews have been murdered again on European soil only because they were Jews and this wave of terrorist attacks -- including murderous anti-Semitic attacks -- is expected to continue -LSB- ... -RSB- Jews deserve protection in every country but we say to Jews : Israel is your home .
The Israeli economy minister Naftali Bennett backed up Netanyahu 's statement : `` Israel is always waiting for them .
Jews can and should have the right to live anywhere , but if there are Jews who are concerned about their future , we are certainly waiting for them . ''
Israeli foreign minister Avigdor Lieberman stated the Danish attacks `` prove what we have said over the years -- that Israel and the Jews are affected by this terrorism before anyone else because they are on the frontline in the war terror is waging against the West and the entire free world . ''
He also said the international community needed `` to ask for more than declarations and demonstrations against this terrorism , but also shake off the rules of political correctness and fight a real all-out war against Islamic terror and its roots . ''
Denmark 's chief rabbi Jair Melchior said Netanyahu 's comments `` disappointed '' him , and argued : `` Terror is not a reason to move to Israel .
-LSB- ... -RSB- People from Denmark move to Israel because they love Israel , because of Zionism .
A video purporting to show the execution of 21 Coptic Christians by supporters of Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant -LRB- ISIL -RRB- has been released yesterday .
The video shows them being beheaded in a location apparently near Tripoli in Libya .
The captives , all shown being executed in orange jumpsuits in the video , were picked up in Sirte , a coastal town in Libya , during December and January .
The video asserts the Christians were targeted by ISIL because of their religion .
The Coptic Orthodox Church stated they were `` confident '' justice would be done on those who executed their followers .
Egypt 's President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi stated : `` Egypt and the whole world are in a fierce battle with extremist groups carrying extremist ideology and sharing the same goals '' .
Pakistan released 173 inmates to Indian authorities at the Wagah border on Monday , out of which 172 were fishermen .
The Pakistani Government ordered the fishermen released from two Karachi jails on Sunday .
Alleged violation of the Arabian Sea maritime boundary of Karachi -RSB- -RSB- led the fishermen to imprisonment in the Malir and Landhi District Jail .
Earlier during the week Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi provided his warm greeting to Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and leaders of other nations in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation who are taking part in the 2015 Cricket World Cup .
The Indian fishermen reportedly had completed the terms of their imprisonment sentences last year ; Pakistan 's Foreign Ministry released a statement on Monday expressing hope for release of Pakistanis whose sentences in India are complete .
India and Pakistan often imprison each other 's fisherman for violating the maritime border .
Pakistan arrested another 38 fishermen last month .
Peter Oborne , former chief political commentator at British broadsheet newspaper the Daily Telegraph , has alleged the paper suppressed and under-reported stories involving banking giant HSBC so as to avoid a loss of advertising revenue .
In a public resignation from the paper published on the openDemocracy website on Tuesday , the veteran journalist and columnist alleges the division between advertising and editorial had not been kept watertight and that editors were committing a form of `` fraud '' on readers of the newspaper .
In Oborne 's article , he details how he submitted a story to the Telegraph regarding HSBC closing a number of prominent British Muslims 's accounts -- despite assurances to the contrary , the story was not published by the paper .
This led to Oborne investigating other coverage of HSBC in the newspaper .
He cites the example of a story written by the Telegraph banking correspondent Harry Wilson on problems with HSBC 's accounts , which Oborne claims was quietly removed from the Telegraph website .
Oborne says the failure of the Telegraph to cover HSBC is also present in the relative coverage given in November 2014 after the bank had to allocate a fund of # 1 billion to compensate customers , as well as an investigation into manipulation of the currency market : Oborne argues these developments were given considerable coverage in competing newspapers including the Guardian , Times , and Mail but the Telegraph covered them only briefly several pages into the business section .
It is a matter of huge regret that Peter Oborne , for nearly five years a contributor to the Telegraph , should have launched such an astonishing and unfounded attack , full of inaccuracy and innuendo , on his own paper . ''
Media commentator Roy Greenslade , writing for the Guardian , described Oborne 's allegations against the Telegraph as `` dynamite '' and said they go `` to the heart of a paper 's credibility '' .
The Barclay brothers , owners of the Telegraph , `` are being held to account '' , according to Greenslade , and Oborne `` has shone a light on a dark reality '' .
Harris Wittels , an executive producer on the comedy television series Parks and Recreation , has been found dead .
The 30-year-old was found unresponsive at his home in Los Angeles by his assistant on Thursday .
Police have announced they are investigating the possibility of a drug overdose .
Wittels had a history of drug abuse and spoke openly about his addiction and treatment in drug rehabilitation centers .
Wittels , from Texas , started work on Parks and Recreation as a writer before being promoted to producer and eventually executive producer .
The last episode is due to be broadcast on NBC next week .
His other working credits include work on The Sarah Silverman Show and Eastbound and Down .
He authored a book , Humblebrag : The Art of False Modesty , which came from a phrase he coined on Twitter .
#humblebrag was used as a term to describe the art of false modesty .
Tributes have come from across the world of television and comedy .
Sarah Silverman called Wittels her `` baby '' .
Parks and Recreation actress Amy Poehler said at a Variety event where she was being honored `` I do n't really feel like telling any jokes .
I lost a dear , young friend in my life who was struggling with addiction . ''
Posting on culture website The AV Club , one fan wrote `` I do n't mean to belittle what those who knew him are going through at all , I know how I feel is nothing compared to what they 're dealing with , but it does feel like I lost a friend . ''
Another posted `` Been sitting here crying since I found out an hour ago .
Said this elsewhere but I genuinely feel like I lost a friend , do n't care how lame that sounds .
Darren Ferguson resigned yesterday as the manager of Peterborough United Football Club .
His departure comes after a 3 -- 0 defeat yesterday to MK Dons .
MacAnthony also spoke about the club 's current performance .
With Ferguson 's resignation five other coaches and officials have left the club .
Dave Robertson , the academy manger , has been put in caretaker charge and is to lead the club until a replacement manager has been found .
Company spokesperson Brandy King explained backup hydraulic systems of 128 of the company 's Boeing 737-700s should have been inspected sooner .
King said the the incident is inadvertent and emphasised the airline 's commitment to safety .
The airline decided to ground the planes involved in the missed inspections and notified the authorities .
The uninspected planes incident involves about twenty percent of its fleet , and caused the airline to cancel about 80 flights on Tuesday , with possibly another 19 cancellations yesterday .
English footballer Adam Johnson has been arrested on suspicion of having sex with a girl under the age of 16 .
Johnson , who currently plays for Sunderland A.F.C. , was arrested yesterday morning at his home .
Durham Police confirmed they had arrested a `` 27-year-old man -LSB- ... -RSB- on suspicion of sexual activity with a girl under 16 . ''
A neighbour of Johnson 's spoke to The Sun newspaper about the arrest .
However since the news of his arrest broke Sunderland AFC have released a statement confirming his suspension .
The club said `` Sunderland AFC has confirmed Adam Johnson has been suspended from the club , pending the outcome of a police investigation . ''
Johnson has made 105 appearances for Sunderland having previously played for Middlesbrough , Leeds United , and Manchester City .
Dr. Beverly Hall , a central figure in an Atlanta , Georgia public schools cheating scandal since 2009 , died at the age of 68 on Monday .
At the time of her death Hall was still facing criminal charges relating to the cheating scandal .
No official statement was released by Hall 's family or her legal team regarding the circumstances of her death however her lawyers stated that Hall maintained her innocence `` to her dying breath . ''
Should she have been convicted of several offences , including racketeering , Hall could have been sentenced to up to 45 years imprisonment .
Current Atlanta Public School Superintendent , Meria Carstarphen commented on Hall 's death : `` We offer our condolences to the family of Dr. Hall .
Hall became the Atlanta Public School Superintendent in 1999 .
During her time as Newark 's Superintendent test scores only increased mildly and the school had financial problems ; Newark 's mayor , Sharpe James , criticised at the time , '' -LSB- Hall -RSB- is getting out of here before you realize she has n't done anything . ''
At the time of the award , Atlanta schools had seen a large improvement on test scores .
Shortly after , The Atlanta Journal-Constitution published a report showing problems with test results .
The report showed test scores had increased implausibly fast , and alleged the school internally detected problems but did n't act on the findings .
Evidence thereafter indicated test papers were tampered with .
Hall , along with 34 other education officials , was indicted in 2013 .
In total twenty-one people pleaded guilty to charges relating to the cheating scandal while several others remain on trial .
Hall became too ill to stand trail after the cancer spread to other parts of her body .
Hall was born in Jamaica , and later moved to the United States .
The US Attorney General has promised Snowden he will not be executed if he is convicted under the Espionage Act , however , Kucherena says , he has not been promised the fair trial he seeks .
Reportedly , `` fair '' , to Snowden 's lawyers , requires he would not be tried under the Espionage Act .
Snowden has been on the run since leaking classified information regarding the NSA 's mass electronic surveillance of the US population to the mainstream media .
Upon returning to the US , Snowden would still have to face trial on two counts of theft of government property .
Spokesman for the US Justice Department Marc Raimondi , in remarks to Reuters , reiterated the position of the US on the case , saying , `` Snowden is not a whistle-blower .
He is accused of leaking classified information and there is no question his actions have inflicted serious harms on our national security '' .
Billionaire Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen yesterday announced his ocean exploration team has found a wreck thought to be the Musashi , one of the largest warships ever built .
The Musashi was a Japanese battleship sunk by US forces during World War Two .
The wreck was discovered yesterday local time under a kilometre of water in the Sibuyan Sea , off the Filipino coast .
Together with sister ship Yamato the Musashi fought in the Battle of Leyte Gulf , one of the war 's biggest sea fights .
The battle was won by the US and Australia , defeating Japan .
Yamato escaped with damage but was sunk the following year , also by US forces .
Musashi boasted a 22-mile reach with its nine main guns , and seven aircraft .
Following seabed mapping the wreck was found using an ROV .
One of the world 's richest people , Allen has reportedly invested much of his wealth in marine exploration and began his quest to find the Musashi out of a lifelong interest in the war .
Scottish footballer Dave Mackay died in an English hospital on Monday .
Mackay 's career took him to England after competitive success at Scottish team Hearts , where he was captain .
He also appeared 22 times playing for the Scottish national side .
In the early seventies Mackay turned his attention to managing , taking the top job at various English and Middle Eastern sides .
Mackay 's management career continued until 1995 .
Late Manchester United player George Best has previously called Mackay the `` hardest man I have ever played against '' .
A minute 's applause is planned as tribute when Scotland takes on Northern Ireland at home on March 25 .
The Supreme Court of Alabama yesterday ordered all judges to halt in issuing same-sex marriage licenses in the state .
The ruling goes against an earlier order by the United States Supreme Court , allowing judges to issue same-sex couples a marriage license .
The ruling said `` As it has done for approximately two centuries , Alabama law allows for ` marriage ' between only one man and one woman .
Alabama -LSB- ... -RSB- judges have a -LSB- ... -RSB- duty not to issue any marriage license contrary to this law .
Nothing in the United States Constitution alters or overrides this duty . ''
David Kennedy , a lawyer who represented an Alabama couple who fought an earlier court ruling , said `` I do n't really think that they can do that .
I 'm not surprised , but I 'm somewhat appalled .
The Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the stay -LRB- on the order striking down the gay marriage ban -RRB- would expire on Feb. 9 .
On Feb. 9 , same-sex marriage effectively became legal in Alabama '' .
The issue of same-sex marriage has been contested over recent months .
Alabama Chief Justice Roy Moore had told judges not to issue licenses .
The national Supreme Court intervened in January , deeming Moore 's decision unconstitutional .
Of the 67 state counties , only a third of them began to issue same-sex marriage licences .
The status of the licenses that have already been issued in Alabama has n't been made clear .
The Alabama Supreme Court said that the pre-issued licenses were `` purported '' .
On this issue , Kennedy said `` These people are married .
There 's nothing the Alabama Supreme Court can do to overturn that . ''
Yuriy Kolobov , the former finance minister of Ukraine has been arrested in Spain on charges of fraud and embezzlement .
Kolobov was wanted , along with former President Viktor Yanukovych , accused of fraud which cost Ukraine billions of dollars in assets .
A brief statement from the Ukrainian interior ministry said : `` We confirm the information that -LSB- Mr Kolobov -RSB- has been detained . ''
No comment was made by Spain 's interior ministry .
A judge at Spain 's High Court will question Kolobov , before dealing with the extradition process .
Kolobov , 41 , is the first member of Yanukovich 's administration to be arrested on charges relating to fraud .
The current Ukrainian government continue efforts to recover lost assets .
The Interim Prime Minister , Arseniy Yatsenyuk , told parliament that Yanukovich has left Ukraine with $ 75 billion of debt .
Two decades in the making , Denny Tedesco 's documentary observes and honours a group of session musicians collectively known as `` The Wrecking Crew '' .
Tedesco explained he was moved to begin the documentary when he learned his father , guitarist Tommy Tedesco , had cancer in 1996 .
`` When they said he had a year to live -- and I always wanted to do this story about The Wrecking Crew -- my concern was , if I do n't do it , it 's going to be the biggest regret of my life '' .
Tedesco commented on his anticipation of audiences ' reaction at Nuart Theatre in Los Angeles , `` People say , ` are n't you tired of watching it ? '
The documentary showcases interviews with the late Tommy Tedesco , guitarist Glen Campbell , drummers Hal Blaine and Earl Palmer , bassist Carol Kaye , and others , amongst the roughly 30 musicians that formed The Wrecking Crew 's loose roster .
Cher , Nancy Sinatra , and Brian Wilson from the Beach Boys are also seen talking about the session artists .
Tedesco explained : `` We had a $ 750,000 bill before we could even release this film theatrically , so no-one was touching us .
Tedesco described reaching out to sponsors to pay off publishers and labels to get the film into cinemas .
`` Every time I got money from a donation , I 'd pay off a label or publisher . ''
A Kickstarter campaign raised $ 300,000 , which paid for licensing and session artists .
Billboard reports the money was able to go towards the creation of outtakes for a future DVD .
Tedesco said he wanted to keep outtakes of the interviews he conducted that did n't make it into the movie .
Aside from the interviews , the documentary also includes footage of The Wrecking Crew , filmed by Hal Blaine .
I 'm going to take a film of you .
Just come walking into the studio , and all of a sudden pretend you 've walked into a great big orgy going on here .
I did that with Glenn Campbell , all the guys '' , Blaine said .
Five people , including two Europeans , have been killed by gunmen during an attack on a bar in Bamako , the capital city of Mali , early on Sunday morning .
At least nine others were injured during the attack in which the assailants used machine guns and grenades .
Three Malians , a French national , and a Belgian security official who was working for the European Union were killed .
Local newspaper al-Akhbar reported al-Murabitun , an Islamic extremist group , say they are behind the shooting .
Commenting for the BBC , Alex Duval-Smith said `` When I arrived there about an hour after the attack , there was a white body bag on the floor .
A dozen Malian police were at the scene , including an inspector who used tables and stools to cordon off the bar .
A witness said the attackers had sped off in a vehicle and on a motorbike and that one had shouted ` Allahu Akbar ' '' .
French President François Hollande said the shooting was `` cowardly '' and spoke to Ibrahim Boubakar Keita , the President of Mali .
The French Embassy in Bamako has warned its citizens living in the city to be on high alert .
Military forces from Chad and Niger yesterday engaged Boko Haram militants within the borders of Nigeria .
This follows African Union endorsement on Friday of the creation of an 8,000-plus strong regional force to combat the threat posed by the militant group .
Along with Cameroon , both Chad and Niger have previously engaged Boko Haram forces who have crossed their borders from the territory they hold in northern Nigeria .
While all three countries have previously aided Nigeria against Boko Haram , the new attacks are Niger 's first push into foreign territory .
Sam Simon died , at the age of 59 , on Sunday of colon cancer , a disease he was diagnosed with in 2012 .
One of the co-creators of the television series The Simpsons , Simon helped create the hugely successful series in 1989 alongside Matt Groening and James L. Brooks .
Before The Simpsons Simon had worked on several shows in various positions .
In 1989 he helped create The Simpsons with Brooks and Groening , and was responsible for hiring the show 's first writing team .
After his diagnosis he began to donate his fortune to charity , estimated at around US$ 100 million .
He donated to and was an active voice for charities focusing on animal rights including PETA .
The Sam Simon Foundation , an organization he founded in 2002 , released a statement to TMZ after his death : `` For those of us who knew him , his voice will forever echo in our minds ; his sense of humor will continue to make us laugh ; and his compassion and generosity will continue to impact our lives -LSB- ... -RSB- Sam , you will be missed by many , but there is a particular sadness among our clinic staff .
We have been together for so long , and your absence will forever leave a void in our lives . ''
He married Playboy Playmate Jami Ferrell in 2000 ; the pair divorced not long after .
Current executive producer of The Simpsons , Al Jean paid tribute to Simon via Twitter , tweeting `` Just heard terrible news of death of @simonsam .
The Federal Aviation Administration -LRB- FAA -RRB- approved the Secret Service to conduct these flying exercises .
The exercises are to be over parts of D.C. airspace which is normally off-limits below 18,000 feet , also called a no-fly aone or the D.C. flight restricted zone .
The exercises are to take place in the very early morning hours over the next several weeks .
According to AP , a U.S. official speaking under condition of anonymity said the agency is testing these drones for law enforcement and to defend against potentially dangerous drones , but declined to comment on the specific details because they 're classified .
The agency is cautious of witnesses of unmanned aerial vehicles flying over D.C. because of a drone sighting incident several weeks ago .
Witnesses saw several unidentified drones flying over Paris , France , which caused concerns .
AP said techniques to be tested include signal jamming .
Most drones use radio-frequency signals for remote control .
Intercepting these signals might allow tracking the drones .
Jamming , though , could interrupt Wi-Fi of people in the vicinity .
Three French sport stars are among the dead following a helicopter crash on Monday in Villa Castelli , Argentina .
In total , ten people died after the crash , which involved two helicopters .
The dead included passengers and both pilots in the mid-air collision .
The victims included Olympic swimmer Camille Muffat , Olympic boxer Alexis Vastine and Florence Arthaud , a yachtswoman .
Both pilots were Argentinian , the remainder of the victims were French and worked as part of the television shows production team .
Bodies of all ten of the victims have been retrieved and taken to the morgue .
The accident occurred while both helicopters were flying at a low altitude in tandem .
Amateur camera footage shows the helicopters colliding when one appears to fly into the path of the other .
Cesar Angulo , Secretary of Security for La Rioja , the province in which the accident happened released an update .
He said `` An explosion occurred and it 's believed that they must have collided .
Aeronautical experts will have to determine that . ''
French President Francois Hollande paid tribute to the victims .
Speaking about the sport stars who lost their lives he said `` They are dead because they wanted to push the boundaries .
An involuntary manslaughter investigation has been opened by French officials .
The procedure occurred automatically due to the fact the French citizens died abroad .
The television show involves contestants taking part in survival style activities in remote locations .
Other contestants taking part included figure skater Philippe Candeloro , footballer Sylvain Wiltord , snowboarder Anne-Flore Marxer , swimmer Alain Bernard and Jeannie Longo , a cyclist .
The show , which was to be shown on TF1 in France started filming in February .
The channel released a statement after the accident .
They said `` We learn with immense sadness of the accident that occurred during the filming of the show ` Dropped . '
-LSB- Staff -RSB- come together in this terrible time with the pain of the families and those close to the victims '' .
French media announced that all contestants and crew are returning home and that filming had been suspended .
Muffat became the Olympic champion in the 400m freestyle event at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , England .
The 25-year-old also won a silver and bronze medal at the same games in different events .
Vastine , 28 , also competed at the 2012 games , being eliminated from the Light Welterweight category in the quarter finals .
Arthaud , 57 , was a yachtswoman who won the 1990 Route du Rhum .
Leo Varadkar , Ireland 's Health Minister , introduced emergency legislation in the lower house of the Irish parliament yesterday evening , to negate the legal loophole created by a decision from Dublin 's Court of Appeal that morning .
Various hard drugs -- including ketamine , ecstasy , and magic mushrooms -- were rendered legal , following the law governing their prohibition being found to be unconstitutional .
The drug possession case of Stanislav Bederev led to the legal loophole ; his lawyers arguing the 2010 addition of several drugs to the country 's controlled substances list , governed by the Misuse of Drugs Act , 1977 , was unlawful .
They contended it was unconstitutional to add these substances to the list without consulting the Oireachtas -- i.e. , parliament .
The Irish government is stressing the urgency of parliamentary legislation to rectify the situation .
`` It is now important from both a public health and criminal justice perspective that the legislation be enacted as soon as possible '' , said a government spokesperson .
The Health Minister expressed concern both for the welfare of individuals taking advantage of the temporary legality of the substances involved , and for drug-related convictions handed down since the now-unconstitutional changes came into effect .
Jeremy Clarkson , one of the presenters on the BBC 's motoring programme ` Top Gear ' has been suspended by the corporation .
Clarkson , responsible for several prior controversies , was suspended Tuesday , after allegedly ` punching ' a producer last week .
The next two episodes of ` Top Gear ' have been pulled from broadcast , with a third -- the season finale -- also unlikely to be shown .
The incident leading to Clarkson 's suspension reportedly occurred after an argument with a producer .
After filming had finished in Newcastle , it is believed Clarkson , 54 punched 36-year-old producer Oisin Tymon over a lack of catering availability .
The incident was reported to the BBC on Monday .
A source spoke to the British newspaper The Daily Mirror about the incident .
They said , `` They came to the end of filming after a long day and Jeremy discovered that no food had been laid on .
He just saw red and hit the assistant producer , who he blamed for not having organised the food .
The BBC released a short statement clarifying the situation .
It said `` Following a fracas with a BBC producer , Jeremy Clarkson has been suspended pending an investigation .
Top Gear will not be broadcast this Sunday .
The BBC will be making no further comment at this time . ''
Previously Clarkson had been given a `` final warning '' by BBC bosses over comments he had made .
In 2014 it appeared that the presenter used a racist term while singing a nursery rhyme , he apologised after the incident came to light .
` Top Gear ' is a motoring programme shown on BBC Two in the United Kingdom .
Clarkson has presented the show since 2002 , co-hosting alongside Richard Hammond and James May .
Ian Holloway has been sacked as manager of Millwall football club .
His sacking , announced on Tuesday , has come after a 1 -- 4 defeat to Norwich City F.C. on March 7 .
Former player Neil Harris has been placed in charge until season 's end .
An official statement was released by club chairman John Berylson .
He said `` This was a hard decision to take because we very much hoped that Ollie would prove to be the man to take us forward and on to the next level .
He added `` Ian Holloway remains a fine manager and it was his impressive track record which led us to appoint him some 14 months ago .
However , our view is that the decision to part company at this stage is in the best interests of the football club going forward . ''
At the time of Holloway 's departure Millwall sat in 23rd position of the Football League Championship , the second tier of English football .
Holloway , 51 , was in charge of Millwall for 62 games ; during his tenure they won only 14 times , losing 29 and drawing the remaining 19 .
Former Millwall player Matt Lawrence spoke to BBC London 94.9 about Holloway 's sacking and offered his opinion .
He said `` I think everybody knew this was coming .
Most people are surprised it has taken this long -LSB- ... -RSB- The fans completely turned and the minute you lose the fans your time is up and it is time to move on . ''
This weekend saw the opening of two new exhibitions at Edinburgh 's National Gallery of Modern Art .
Wikinews attended Thursday 's press preview for the event where a full contingent of the capital 's press turned out to see the striking collection of paintings , photographs , and other works .
Presented below are a selection of images captured at the preview .
REFLECTIONS : A Series of Changing Displays of Contemporary Art , billed as a showcase of a `` diverse range of internationally-renowned contemporary and modern artists '' is to display major works from the Gallery 's permanent collection , alongside important loans .
Alongside this broad range of works , a three-room display of pieces on-loan from the Roy Lichtenstein Foundation -- with a dramatic painted steel relief , ` borrowed ' from the Tate in London -- runs from March 14 through to January 10 next year .
A bus carrying 60 passengers to a religious event in the Santa Catarina state of Brazil plunged over a cliff on Saturday evening .
The driver reportedly lost control whilst approaching a curve , leading the bus to fall 400 metres into a wooded area just ten kilometres away from Joinville , the final destination .
Whilst the cause of the accident is not yet confirmed , police believe that the brakes on the vehicle may have failed .
Approximately 100 rescue workers , plus fifteen ambulances and a helicopter were on the scene ; although , the accident happened at nightfall making access to the area difficult .
President Dilma Rousseff expressed her condolences upon hearing the news , saying : `` In this hour of pain of suffering , I want to extend my sympathies to the families and friends who have lost their dear ones . ''
With 30 seats in the Knesset , Benjamin Netanyahu is likely to be able to form the next government as a coalition of right-wing parties after beating out the centre-left alliance , Zionist Union .
Netanyahu described the victory as being `` against all odds '' .
While Netanyahu campaigned primarily on the issue of national security -LRB- including a promise that if elected , he would not allow the Palestinians to get statehood -RRB- , many voters have been focussed on domestic matters , such as housing and the growing cost of living , which has remained a live issue since protests in 2011 .
The highest court in Sweden , the Supreme Court , agreed on Monday to try the case '' Ö 849-15 '' between Bildkonst Upphovsrätt i Sverige -LRB- BUS , Visual Arts Copyright Society in Sweden -RRB- and Wikimedia Sverige -LRB- Wikimedia Sweden -RRB- .
The jurisprudence could result in Freedom of Panorama being effectively overturned in Sweden , requiring websites such as Wikimedia Commons , which is maintained by the Wikimedia Foundation , to delete thousands of images .
Not long after Wikimedia Sverige created the website offentligkonst.se to publish images and metadata about artworks placed in public spaces in Sweden , BUS , a pro-copyright lobby , advocated that it constituted infringement on the artists ' copyright .
The current lawsuit opposes the interpretation of Wikimedia -- that artwork permanently installed in public space should be subject to the Freedom of Panorama exception that is in effect in Sweden -- to that of BUS -- that is creation -LRB- avbilda -RRB- of images and videos of an artwork in a public space is allowed , their distribution -LRB- återge -RRB- remains prohibited .
Anna Troberg , an author and former leader of the Swedish Pirate Party which advocates copyright reform , commented on her blog , `` In a time when everyone has a high-grade camera in their phone , it is more than a little naive to think one can place one 's work in public space without it being photographed and posted online . ''
On December 15 , the cafe was taken hostage by a gunman , Man Haron Monis .
The siege lasted for over sixteen hours until the gunman was taken down .
Two plaques , in the honor of the employee and customer who died , were put up at the front door entrance .
The CEO of Lindt Australia , Steve Loane , praised the reopening .
A note on a flower bouquet outside the entrance read , `` The light shines in the darkness and darkness has never put it out . ''
Herat said `` It was extremely important for me to be here and support Lindt and support the people I work with . ''
Herat also notes of Tori Johnson , the manager of the cafe who was killed during the hostage situation , `` He was the first person who 'd come and greet me at the door , so that 'll take a long time to adjust to '' .
The premier of New South Wales , Mike Baird , attended the reopening too .
The premier also praised Herat .
The attacks targeted mosques used by supporters of the Houthi rebel movement , who reportedly support former president Ali Abdullah Saleh and now control Sanaa .
The elected president , Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi , has moved to Aden , to the south .
Muslim militant group Islamic State have claimed responsibility for the attack , according to Twitter accounts known to be connected to the group .
Islamic State are known to have set up a base in Yemen last November , but are not known to have previously carried out an attack there .
A White House spokesman , Josh Earnest , stated that the group 's claim of responsibility can not be confirmed , and raised the possibility the claim could be propaganda .
al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula , centered in Yemen , denied responsibility , highlighting their leader has declared mosques and markets off-limits for attack .
Yemeni Political adviser Mohamed Qubaty attributed the attacks to supporters of Saleh .
Qubaty called the attacks `` a plot to widen the schism between the Sunnis and Zaydis '' .
Zaydi refers to the branch of Islam followed by the Houthis .
The Association of Latin Entertainment Critics of New York published Thursday and updated yesterday , at its official websites , a press release condemning Spanish RTVE 's United States correspondent and bureau chief Almudena Ariza , asking RTVE 's Ethics Department to `` dismiss the correspondent and remove the correspondent from the US '' .
The journalistic association said Ariza made `` offensive insults and false accusations '' against Spanish American filmmaker Artur Balder .
The New York-based journalistic association founded in 1967 is the oldest Latin press association in the United States .
The press release is introduced by the president and founding member of the journalistic association , Fernando Campos , who was honored last month at his homeland the Dominican Republic with the Award of Journalistic Merit by Acroarte , the Association of Art Critics of the Dominican Republic .
According to the journalistic association , Ariza `` sought directly to cause the greatest moral damages , based on the falsehood that the film and research on ` Little Spain ' did not exist . ''
Regarding the film Little Spain directed by Artur Balder , they note it is now available on DVD .
RTVE 's potential audience is Spanish and Latin American , and is financially supported by Spanish taxpayers .
Lee Kuan Yew , the first Prime Minister of Singapore , has died at the age of 91 .
Considered the `` founding father '' of Singapore , Lee led Singapore through the aftermath of independence to become one of the world 's richest nations .
The current Prime Minister of Singapore , Lee Hsien Loong , announced the former Prime Minister 's death in a televised statement .
Prime Minister Lee , who is the eldest son of Lee Kuan Yew , said `` The first of our founding fathers is no more .
More tributes came from within Singapore and around the world .
The President of the United States , Barack Obama , called Lee `` a true giant of history . ''
Xi Jinping , the Chinese President , said `` Lee Kwan Yew 's passing is as much a loss for the international community as it is for Singapore '' .
He was condemned by opponents over many of his strict home policies .
During his tenure the press and media was strictly controlled and chewing gum was banned .
Lee defended his tough stance in a 2010 New York Times interview , saying `` I 'm not saying everything I did was right -LSB- ... -RSB- But everything I did was for an honourable purpose . ''
Germanwings Flight 9525 , an Airbus A320 carrying 150 passengers and crew , crashed into the French Alps yesterday between Digne and Barcelonnette .
Officials said there were no survivors .
The plane was flying to Duesseldorf , Germany from Barcelona , Spain .
An emergency recovery team made its way to the crash site and reportedly recovered one of the plane 's flight recorders .
According to French authorities , 144 passengers were aboard the plane , reportedly including sixteen school children who were travelling on a German exchange project .
A further six crew were present , including the two pilots .
The flight was predominately made up of Spanish and German citizens .
The pilots did not send a distress signal .
Various officials described the crash as an accident ; the White House stated terrorism is not believed to be a factor .
The plane descended for eight minutes before impact falling , by various reports , more than 30,000 feet .
French President François Hollande said regarding the accident `` I would like to send all our solidarity to the family of the victims -LSB- ... -RSB- It 's a new air tragedy ; we must know all the causes .
We are in mourning because this accident happened on our territory '' .
According to French prosecutor Bruce Robin the plane was completely destroyed .
Germanwings is owned by Lufthansa .
CEO of Lufthansa Carsten Spohr said `` We do not yet know what has happened to flight 4U 9525 .
My deepest sympathy goes to the families and friends of our passengers and crew on 4U 9525 .
The plane , registered as D-AIPX , had been in service for nearly 25 years .
Lil ' Chris , an English singer and television personality , died on Monday , police reported that day .
The 24-year-old Chris Hardman was found dead at an address in Lowestoft , Suffolk .
Suffolk Police said they were not treating it as a suspicious death .
Hardman came to fame as Lil ' Chris after appearing on the Channel 4 reality television show Rock School .
Rock School in 2006 featured a student rock band that KISS frontman Gene Simmons created .
Hardman was chosen to be the bands lead singer by Simmons .
Speaking to The Daily Mirror , Simmons paid tribute to Hardman .
McFly band member Dougie Poynter paid tribute to Hardman on Instagram ; he posted alongside a photograph of him , `` So sad to hear about Lil Chris .
Our thoughts go out to his family and friends . ''
Boxer Anthony Ogogo praised him as a `` super-talented kid '' ; Ogogo and Hardman both went to Kirkley High School .
Prior to his death Hardman had spoken about his battle with depression on Twitter .
He once tweeted `` Depression really sucks .
Take time to understand it , for everybody . ''
Since his death has been announced the suicide helpline charity The Samaritans have released a statement .
They said `` If anyone has been affected by this news , or is struggling to cope , we would like to let people know that Samaritans is here for them if they need to talk . ''
Human rights activists have called the move `` backward '' and `` brutalizing '' .
Karen McCreary , executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Utah said , `` We believe all current methods of capital punishment violate the eighth amendment to the US constitution that outlaws cruel and unusual punishment , but this particular method , firing squad , seems very barbaric and something more associated with war '' .
Last July , U.S Court of Appeals judge , Alex Kozinski , wrote , `` The firing squad strikes me as the most promising .
Eight or ten large-caliber rifle bullets fired at close range can inflict massive damage , causing instant death every time . ''
Jay Chapman , the man who developed the protocol for lethal injections still used today , said in 2007 remarks to CNN that lethal injection `` works if it 's administered competently '' , but added it does require skill to perform .
Zayn Malik , one of the members of British pop boy-band One Direction , has left the group after five years .
The band confirmed yesterday that Malik has left the group with a statement on Facebook .
They also announced they would continue with the remaining four members and their fifth album would be recorded later this year .
Malik , 22 , also released a statement through Facebook confirming his departure .
After news of Malik 's departure spread fans took to social media to share their disappointment .
On Twitter the hashtag #AlwaysInOurHeartsZaynMalik was created and 48,000 comments were left on the statement posted by the band on Facebook .
The Employer Advice Service , based at Manchester company Peninsula , said 220 people had called overnight regarding compassionate leave relating to the news .
Speaking to the Manchester Evening News , employment law director Alan Price said `` While I sympathise with One Direction fans , I hardly think this qualified as compassionate leave '' .
One Direction formed as a group in 2010 after competing as single artists on the British reality music competition The X Factor .
The band was signed by Simon Cowell 's record label after the show , which they finished third on .
The remaining members of the group are Harry Styles , Niall Horan , Liam Payne and Louis Tomlinson .
On the cockpit voice recorder , the captain can be heard trying to get back into the cockpit .
Transponder data indicates the autopilot was told to descend form 38,000 feet to 100 feet .
The last part of the recording contains screaming during the sudden decent .
The co-pilot started training in 2008 , and was diagnosed in 2009 with serious depression according to BBC News .
The letters were sent to ministers of the previous Labour government in the years of 2004 and 2005 and contain advocacy that has been described as `` particularly frank '' .
The Guardian newspaper have been attempting to have these letters released using freedom of information legislation for ten years .
In 2012 , the Attorney General Dominic Grieve blocked the publication of the letters despite a ruling from the information tribunal that the release of the letters is in the public interest .
Grieve 's statement at the time argued Prince Charles ' correspondence was `` of very considerable practical benefit '' to his `` preparations for kingship '' as `` such correspondence and dialogue will assist him in fulfilling his duties '' .
Grieve went on to argue correspondence of this nature `` must be under conditions of confidentiality '' otherwise both the Prince and government ministers `` will feel seriously inhibited from exchanging views candidly and frankly '' .
The statement from Grieve asserts `` The Prince of Wales is party-political neutral '' and `` it is highly important that he is not considered by the public to favour one political party or another '' , but that if the letters were released there would be the risk he would be `` viewed by others as disagreeing with government policy '' and `` such perception would be seriously damaging to his role as future Monarch , because if he forfeits his position of political neutrality as heir to the Throne , he can not easily recover it when he is King . ''
Lord Neuberger , in giving the majority decision of the court , stated the Attorney General could not veto the release `` merely because he , a member of the executive , considering the same facts and arguments , takes a different view from that taken by the tribunal or court '' .
Neuberger said the legislation 's veto power did not go so far as to `` enable a member of the executive to over-ride a judicial decision '' and that the Attorney General `` proceeded on the basis of findings which differed radically from those made by the upper tribunal without real or adequate explanation . ''
Appeal judges had subsequently ruled this veto on the part of the Attorney General to be unlawful , and the further appeal by the government to the Supreme Court has been unsuccessful .
The government is required to release the documents within 30 days , although it is possible some of the contents may be redacted .
Prime Minister David Cameron said the decision was `` disappointing '' : `` This is about the principle that senior members of the Royal Family are able to express their views to government confidentially .
I think most people would agree this is fair enough . ''
A spokeswoman for Cameron elaborated : `` The prime minister has been very clear this morning it is a deeply disappointing judgment .
He thinks what 's at stake here is an important principle about the ability of senior members of the royal family to express their views to government confidentially .
So while we have taken steps in this parliament to strengthen the ability to do that through the FOI act , if there needs to be more done to make that clear , then the prime minister is clear those steps should happen in the next parliament . ''
The Labour MP Paul Flynn raised the possibility the ruling might have consequences for Charles ' suitability to be King : `` If there are serious questions about the suitability of Prince Charles as a monarch there could be a question in the public mind about whether to skip a generation .
The attorney general already said the main justification for keeping the letters secret was they would hinder Charles 's ability to be a successful monarch . ''
The state funeral for Malcolm Fraser , the former Prime Minister of Australia , was held in Melbourne on Friday .
Fraser died last week at the age of 84 after a short illness .
Hundreds of people attending the funeral , held Scots ' Church , including the current Prime Minister of Australia , Tony Abbott .
The church , which seats 700 , placed 1,000 chairs in the street outside for members of the public could join the family in remembering Fraser .
He came to office after Gough Whitlam was sacked by Sir John Kerr , the Governor-General , becoming the only ever Australian Prime Minister to be dismissed from office .
After initially being selected as caretaker leader , Fraser won the following three general elections .
Fraser died only five months after his predecessor , Whitlam .
Paying tribute to Fraser was Peter Nixon , a minister in Fraser 's cabinet .
In a eulogy he spoke about the contest between Fraser and Whitlam , he said `` The fact that Gough and Malcolm , who were the leaders in the toughest political contest in the nation 's history , came to respect and like each other demonstrates what big men they were . ''
He also said that Australia had `` lost a unique and great Australian '' .
Former Prime Minister 's Kevin Rudd and Bob Hawke were unable to attend the funeral with Rudd sending his youngest son on his behalf .
The five former leaders all attended Whitlam 's state funeral in November of last year .
A keen supporter of human rights , Fraser introduced a law that saw Indigenous Australians regain land in the northern territory .
Outside the church was a large gathering of Vietnamese Australians paying tribute to the former Prime Minister .
They held banners paying tribute such as `` Farewell to our champion of humanity . ''
Fraser has welcomed Vietnamese immigrants to Australia during his term .
The UEFA Euro 2016 qualification match between Montenegro and Russia on Friday was abandoned after players and coaching staff got involved in a brawl .
The match , at Montenegrin capital Podgorica 's Gradski Stadion , was suspended within the first minute after the Russian goalkeeper was hit with a flare .
The match re-started after a delay but was called off around the 66th minute when a brawl started .
The flare , thrown from the crowd , hit 28-year-old Russian goalkeeper Igor Akinfeev on the back of the head less than 30 seconds after the game had started .
The game was suspended and play delayed for 35 minutes after the incident .
Akinfeev was substituted with Yuri Lodygin coming on in his place .
Akinfeev , who plays his domestic football for CSKA Moscow , suffered a neck injury and minor burns and was taken to a Podgorica hospital .
Disturbances caused a further 18-minute delay in starting the second half .
Play resumed and Russia were awarded a penalty on the 66th minute .
Roman Shirokov saw his penalty saved by Vukasin Poleksic and the score remained 0 -- 0 .
In the moments after the penalty players and officials from both teams started a brawl on the pitch .
The players were led off the pitch , and the crowd was told the game had been called off .
Montenegrin Football Association general secretary Momir Djurdjevac gave his reaction the the events .
He said to Reuters , `` These fans sing ` Montenegro we love you ' but throw flares , insult rivals and cause all sorts of incidents every time they turn up and that 's outright hypocrisy -LSB- ... -RSB- We have left the impression of barbarians and this is a complete disaster .
It seems we do n't deserve to have a nation , a football team or a berth in a major tournament .
As far as I am concerned the game should not have continued after the first-minute incident .
We can only thank God that no one was seriously hurt '' .
He also spoke about his fear of the repercussions it could have on Montenegro 's hopes to qualify for Euro 2016 .
Russia and Montenegro are competing in Group G of the qualification process .
The plane , a 1974 Piper , model PA28140 , crashed in a field just east of the airport .
The plane belonged to Springfield , Virginia resident William Rushing III .
Flying instructors suggested birds might have contributed to the crash .
The Federal Aviation Administration -LRB- FAA -RRB- and the National Transportation Safety Board -LRB- NTSB -RRB- are continuing their investigation as to what actually happened .
He said a sixteen-year-old flying either alone or with a certified pilot is allowed .
The NTSB predicted five to ten business days for a preliminary report .
The Spotsylvania County school district sent out a memorandum saying the school 's administration is working with counsellors to help students cope with the loss of their classmate .
Grief counsellors were available at the school to provide support to students .
The bodies of two adults and two children were found yesterday at a flat in Gibraltar in a possible murder-suicide .
Two young girls , one aged four and the other only six weeks , were found stabbed alongside a British 31-year-old male and a Spanish 37-year-old female .
Royal Gibraltar Police said despite opening up a crime investigation on the deaths they do not currently believe anyone else was involved .
Police said an apartment letting agency staff member notified them about the property where the bodies were discovered .
Police responded to the flat , in the Boschetti 's Steps area , at around 11:35 local time .
Police said `` They got no answer from within but noticed that the house was locked from inside and that sent a few alarm bells ringing and they decided to call the police -LSB- ... -RSB- At the moment what we are doing is trying to get as much background information from both the Spanish and the UK sides of the family . ''
Police also said the family were not permanent residents in Gibraltar and had entered the British overseas territory only days ago .
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office said they too were looking into the incident .
Fabian Picardo , the Gibraltar Chief Minister , spoke of his shock after hearing about the deaths .
`` As a husband and father , I -- like no doubt all Gibraltarians and residents of Gibraltar -- am in total shock to hear about this terrible crime -LSB- ... -RSB- Gibraltarians are not accustomed to witness this type of incident in our peaceful and law abiding community .
Words will fail us all at a moment like this and all we can do is keep the victims and their families in our thoughts . ''
Due to the incident he ordered parliament be adjourned until Wednesday .
Well-known Canadian singer-songwriter Joni Mitchell was found unconscious on Tuesday at her Los Angeles home , and immediately taken to hospital , according to reports .
An update on her condition appeared yesterday on her website .
The update yesterday on her website said , `` Joni remains under observation in the hospital and is resting comfortably .
Webpage ` We love you Joni ' was also created for fans on Facebook and Twitter to send Mitchell messages to get well soon .
A previous statement left on Mitchell 's website on Tuesday said , `` Joni was found unconscious in her home this afternoon .
They added , `` More updates to come when we hear them .
Light a candle and sing a song , let 's all send good wishes her way . ''
On her twitter account , CBC news producer Leslie Stojsic gave a conflicting statement to other reports on Mitchell 's condition , saying , `` Source tells me she 's in hospital recovering after ` minor medical emergency , ' was * not * found unconscious . ''
She also added , `` I 'm told now she 's resting in hospital and is among friends .
It did not take long for her condition in hospital to spread through the social media .
Mitchell also reportedly suffers from Morgellons disease ; a skin condition where people claim they have fibres coming out of their skin , along with tingling sensations .
In her memoir , ` Joni Mitchell : In her own words , ' released last year , the folk artist describes her experiences with the disease saying , `` All the time it felt like I was being eaten alive by parasites living under my skin .
Sarah Brady , gun control campaigner and widow of former US White House Press Secretary James Brady , has died at the age of 73 .
Her death was announced by the Brady Campaign and Center to Prevent Gun Violence .
Brady died on Friday after a battle with pneumonia according to e-mails sent by her family .
A statement by the Brady Campaign and Center to Prevent Gun Violence was posted on Facebook .
On March 30 , 1981 , Sarah Brady 's husband , James , was injured in a shooting attempted assassination of US President Ronald Reagan .
A bullet entered his head and lodged in his brain .
The attack by John W. Hinckley Jr. also injured three more people , including President Reagan .
In the years after the shooting , Sarah Brady became an advocate for gun control laws , and in 1989 vice chair of Handgun Control , Inc. .
In 2001 Handgun Control , Inc. became known as the Brady Campaign in tribute of both Sarah and James ' efforts in fighting for tougher gun control .
Brady said `` the proudest moment of our lives '' was in 1993 when President Bill Clinton signed into effect the Brady Bill , tightening gun law legislation .
Former First Lady Nancy Reagan released a statement regarding the death of her `` dear friend '' Sarah Brady .
Another tribute came from former Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords .
Giffords , who was was shot in the head and nearly killed in 2011 , said `` We know Sarah will be missed by all those whose lives she touched and who were so inspired by her commitment to her late husband Jim and to the cause of reducing gun violence in our country -LSB- ... -RSB- Sarah Brady showed us not only what a tireless fight for common sense looks like , but also what it means to be a loving spouse and caretaker in the wake of a senseless tragedy .
Our prayers are with her son Scott , her daughter Missy , and the entire Brady Campaign family as they mourn this devastating loss '' .
Brady 's death has come less than a year after the death of her husband .
James Brady also died at the age of 73 last August .
Jurors in the US federal criminal trial of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev found him guilty yesterday of all 30 charges for the bombing of the Boston Marathon which occurred on April 15 , 2013 .
Tsarnaev was also found guilty of shooting dead Sean Collier , an MIT police officer .
The jury took eleven hours across two days to find Tsarnaev guilty .
During the fifteen days of the trial , the prosecutors called 92 witnesses to testify as to the chaotic scenes following the bombing .
The father of Martin Richard , an eight-year-old boy killed in the bombing , said he had to make the difficult choice to leave his wounded son to die so he could get help for his six-year-old daughter whose leg had been destroyed in the blast .
Footage presented in court showed Tsarnaev placing a backpack containing the bomb close to the location of Martin Richard .
Tsarnaev was represented by Judy Clarke , a death penalty specialist who previously represented Ted Kaczynski , the `` Unabomber '' .
The defence focused on averting the death penalty , and called only four witnesses , seeking to present Tsarnaev 's older brother Tamerlan as the guiding force in the attack .
They said that Tamerlan searched online for terms like `` detonator '' and that while Tamerlan 's fingerprints were found on the bombs , Dzhokhar 's were not .
Though Massachusetts does not have the death penalty , as the case is being heard in federal court the prosecutors are able to seek the death penalty .
The second phase of the trial is to decide whether or not Tsarnaev will be executed or sentenced to life in prison .
The approval ratings of UK Labour leader Ed Miliband rose above those of his Conservative opponent , David Cameron , for the first time in this year 's bitterly fought general election campaign .
The poll results showed support for the Labour Party was also rising .
A poll by Panelbase yesterday showed Labour six points ahead ; a similar survey by Survation for the Daily Mirror showed Labour four points ahead of the Conservatives .
This latter poll was mixed for the Labour leader as it showed only 25 % of voters were convinced Miliband was suited to the job of Prime Minister while 37 % preferred David Cameron , but it also shows that people preferred Miliband 's recent conduct as party leader to Cameron 's .
A poll by TNS found a three point lead for Labour .
Following the poll results , the Conservative Party fired a volley of negative remarks towards Labour .
Defense secretary Michael Fallon said Ed Miliband would end up signing up for `` a grubby backstairs deal '' with the Scottish National Party -LRB- SNP -RRB- which would lead to the cancellation or non-renewal of the Trident nuclear submarine programme .
The Labour Party have stated they support the continuation of Trident and will not negotiate on Trident with the SNP .
Miliband responded to Fallon 's comments : `` Michael Fallon is a decent man , but today I think he has demeaned himself and he has demeaned his office .
Former Labour leader Tony Blair said Fallon 's remarks hinted at desperation : `` The Tories were up to their old tricks in their personal attack on Ed this morning .
It shows how nervous they are of a Labour campaign full of confidence , which is showing that it understands the challenges facing working people and how to overcome them .
The two main parties have also proposed a number of new ideas for policy .
Labour 's Yvette Cooper is to formally announce a new policy today to protect 10,000 police officers ' jobs by eliminating elected Police and Crime Commissioners and gun licensing subsidy , and sharing of police back-office services and procurement .
The Labour crime and justice manifesto also includes creating a new commission on sexual and domestic violence , banning `` legal highs '' , and reforming prisons to introduce more education and work for prisoners .
Conservative Cameron pre-announced a proposal to change the rules so workers in the public sector and for companies with 250 employees or more -- which between the two is estimated to be around half the work force -- would be entitled to three days of paid volunteering leave per year .
This marks a return of the language of the ` Big Society ' which had slowly disappeared from use since the last election .
To avoid a no-fly zone over parts of Yemen , India transported people via the African state of Djibouti .
This was achieved using ships of the Indian Navy as transport from Aden across the Bab-el-Mandeb strait to Djibouti , and Air India planes flying from Sanaa to Djibouti , and from there onward to India .
The Pakistani navy rescued eleven Indians , for which Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave a vote of thanks .
Along with ending the evacuation , India also announced the closing of its embassy in Sanaa .
Saudi Arabia has begun air strikes in the area against the Houthi rebels who have taken control of the city , in apparent support of previous President Ali Abdullah Saleh .
In Washington D.C. , the U.S. Capitol building has reopened after shots were fired in front of it .
For safety , no entry or exit was permitted from the building after a man committed suicide just before 2pm local time yesterday .
The lockdown lasted until around 3:50 pm while members of the bomb squad investigated the man 's backpack , suitcase , and the surrounding area .
A witness estimated 60 other persons were in the area at the time of death .
Witnesses reported the man had a sign of protest about taxation and social justice .
Congress was not in session during the attack but are returning from recess tomorrow .
Mr Penny was charged by homicide detectives after a revived investigation found Penny had disclosed details of the women 's deaths to various people , that he could only have known firsthand .
He allegedly told Mrs Acocks 's husband the morning after her death that she was killed with a comb , and `` died very quickly '' ; police found no weapon at the scene in 1991 .
The prosecution also alleges Mr Penny revealed details of the murders in phone calls to both his son and daughter in the hours following the attack , again referring to the use of a tail-comb as the weapon .
Investigators at the time initially believed there may have been two weapons , and Homicide Detective Senior Constable Tom Hogan told the court `` it would have been impossible for him or any of the police to understand the nature of the injuries '' before an autopsy was carried out .
Mr Penny was released on bail due to poor health , under conditions including surrender of his passport .
He is due to face court again in July .
Douglas Mark Hughes , a mailman for the United States Postal Service , landed his gyrocopter on the west lawn of the US Capitol on Wednesday .
The mailman was flying his aircraft into restricted airspace when he landed on the lawn .
His stated intention was to deliver letters to all members of Congress concerning campaign finance statutes .
Hughes told the Tampa Bay Times of his intentions to fly the light-weight aircraft .
The paper said they alerted the Secret Service and the United States Capitol Police , but FOX News reported some disagreement about this from Capitol Police .
The mailman said his intention was non-violent , but he wanted to spread the word about his cause .
He was released from jail under conditions including that he must not visit the US Capitol .
Besides this low-flying aircraft incident , a government employee crashed a drone onto the White House property a few months ago .
Also , the Secret Service conducted drone exercises to combat against possibly rogue light-weight aircraft last month .
The airspace above the Washington D.C. region is protected below 18,000 feet MSL -LRB- Mean Sea Level -RRB- with the roughly fifteen-nautical-mile-radius Flight Restricted Zone which surrounds the VHF omnidirectional range located at Washington National Airport , which handles regularly scheduled commercial flights .
Pilots are not allowed to fly in the Washington , DC Metropolitan Area Special Flight Rules Area , which includes the Flight Restricted Zone , unless they have FAA authorization and are able to maintain effective communication with air traffic control with a two-way radio .
Pilots must obtain a transponder code when flying under visual flight rules in this area .
Law enforcement and air ambulance operations are exempted from the FAA authorization requirement if they can maintain communications with air traffic control .
The FAA was investigating this incident , along with law enforcement agencies .
Police found no explosives in the aircraft .
On Friday a car bomb , claimed by Islamic State of Iraq and Syria -LRB- ISIS -RRB- , killed , by varying reports , at least three people and injured at least five others , possibly including a US national , outside of the United States Consulate in Irbil , Iraq .
According to the US Department of State there were no injuries to consulate personnel .
Reportedly the primary blast took place at approximately 5:40 p.m. local time , when the neighborhood is busy .
A student killed a school teacher at the Instituto Joan Fuster in Barcelona , Spain on Monday .
Reports indicate the student was thirteen years old ; police said he was under fourteen .
The student reportedly had a crossbow and knife ; however police have not yet confirmed the cause of death .
Two other teachers and two students received non-life-threatening injuries in the attack .
One teacher was treated for minor injuries on scene , while the other three injured were treated at Barcelona hospitals .
Police said the motive for the attack has not been established .
The attack happened on the sixteenth anniversary of the Columbine High School massacre in the United States .
According to Spanish law , the boy , because he is under fourteen years of age , can not be held criminally responsible .
As a result he can not be jailed , but can be institutionalized in a mental health facility and was sent for psychiatric examinations following the attack .
Storms hit communites along the east coast of Australia including Newcastle , the Hunter Region , the Central Coast , the Illawarra region , and Sydney .
The Bureau of Meteorology reported a deep low-pressure system has caused heavy rainfall and strong winds which reached 130kph -LRB- 80mph -RRB- .
Winds were predicted to ease today .
There have been blackouts throughout the region and severe flooding which has caused roads , bridges and houses to be washed away .
More than 500 volunteers were working with the State Emergency Service to assist with operations and protect individuals , with firefighters from the Rural Fire Service and Fire Rescue according to State Emergency Service deputy commissioner Steven Pearce .
They issued a warning that residents in Newcastle and surrounding areas might experience flash flooding .
The Insurance Council of Australia reported already during the day yesterday more than 5500 policyholder claims due to the storms .
New South Wales premier Mike Baird said people should leave work early and arrive home before dark , as storms were predicted to intensify .
NSW transport authorities said 300 sets of traffic lights in Syndey were out and motorists should be cautious or preferably not drive .
Authorities advised residents to stay away from flood-waters and from areas exposed to surf , where heavy surf can lead to coastal damage and erosion .
Kor is amongst a number of Auschwitz survivors attending the trial who have joined the prosecutors as co-plaintiffs in the case against Mr Gröning .
While Kor has forgiven Mr Gröning , she still holds him liable for his involvement during the Holocaust , as she did last week when she testified against him .
Other survivors have recently spoken out about the trial ; survivor Eva Pusztai-Fahidi said on Tuesday the trial itself against a former SS guard matters more than the end punishment .
During the first day of Mr Gröning 's trial , he denied any direct role in the killings , though he did admit to having witnessed them .
Mr Gröning said he shared `` moral guilt '' for the crimes , regardless of whether his actions make him criminally guilty .
The prosecutors have argued that serving as a concentration camp guard is legally accessory to the act of murder .
Mr Gröning is reportedly one of three remaining former SS guards that have been identified for trial .
If found guilty , the former SS Guard could reportedly face up to fifteen years in prison .
Tokyo Electric Power Company -LRB- TEPCO -RRB- , which runs the plant , said the affected pumps pull radioactive water out of a drainage channel , sending it through another channel to an enclosed artificial bay .
This transfer began on April 17 , following an official report released in February by TEPCO , revealing high concentration of radioactive materials found in the plant 's drainage water .
This latest news from the nuclear plant , which sits on the eastern edge of the island nation , alongside the North Pacific Ocean , comes four years after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster , on March 12 , 2011 .
This disaster saw the nuclear plant subjected to the combined force of an earthquake and tsunami , which caused an explosion at the plant .
Since then , the site has remained unstable .
The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution found small amounts of radioactive caesium isotopes along the coast of North America , reported early this month .
Along with these caesium substances , TEPCO reports indicate up to 10 trillion becquerels of strontium-90 and 40 trillion becquerels of tritium have contaminated sea water as a result of , and in the aftermath of , the 2011 disaster .
A crowd of over 10,000 people attended the dawn service on Saturday at Gallipoli , Turkey for the 100th anniversary of the landing of Australian and New Zealand troops there in 1915 .
The solemn remembrance ceremony was held at the site of the original Gallipoli landings , now known as Anzac Cove .
The Gallipoli Campaign of the First World War is remembered as a failed attack in which thousands of lives were lost for little to no gain for either side .
The campaign killed 45,000 Allied and 86,000 Turkish troops .
Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott 's speech later in the day emphasised the importance of the day to Australians .
`` Like every generation since , we are here on Gallipoli because we believe the Anzacs represented Australians at their best .
Prince Charles stirred emotions by reading extracts from a serviceman 's diary .
The diary entry , by Company Quartermaster Sergeant Benjamin Leane , was addressed to his wife and was written hours before the first Gallipoli landing .
The centenary milestone of Anzac Day also drew a Turkish security force of 3700 , both police and paramilitary .
Attendees entered past six security checkpoints .
The execution came nearly ten years after their 2006 conviction , in which time both men had become fully rehabilitated , said Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott .
Chan had become a Christian minister and Sukumaran turned to painting to help other prisoners at Kerobokan Prison to rehabilitate .
The two Australian men as well as the other six men executed were confirmed dead 27 minutes after they faced a firing squad , said Indonesian officials .
They refused blindfolds when they stood before the firing squad , and sang `` Amazing Grace '' , according to witnesses .
Australian officials condemned the executions , with Prime Minister Tony Abbott saying the relationship between the neighbouring countries has reached a `` dark moment '' .
The Prime Minister , as well as the Foreign Minister , Julie Bishop , agreed to withdraw the Australian ambassador to Indonesia `` once all the courtesies have been extended to the Chan and Sukumaran families '' , who were staying in the Cilacap region .
Mr Abbott said , `` We respect Indonesia 's sovereignty but we do deplore what 's been done and this can not be simply business as usual . ''
Australian authorities are coming under question , with lawyer Bob Myers saying `` this is a black day for the AFP -LSB- Australian Federal Police -RSB- , a day they deliberately exposed nine Australians to the death penalty '' .
Myers was contacted by the father of Bali Nine member Scott Rush after the father suspected his son 's involvement in the operation , which aimed to import 8.3 kilograms of heroin into Australia , with an estimated street value of about A$ 4 million .
Myers said the AFP knew of the plans of every member of the Bali Nine , excluding Sukumaran , `` and they did n't want to stop these people . ''
He said the AFP had the opportunity to arrest the Australians before they left for Indonesia , meaning they would face a prison sentence in Australia , and avoid the death penalty .
In not doing so , Myers said , they now have `` blood on their hands '' .
Tributes have flowed in on social media using hashtag #IStandForMercy .
Many Australians have also said they will boycott future plans to travel to the island nation , using hashtags #boycottindonesia and #boycottbali .
Indiana Governor Mike Pence dropped his former opposition to needle exchange programs and on Tuesday signed legislation passed by lawmakers on April 29 -- the last day of the state 's legislative session -- that would allow local health departments , municipalities , counties , or nonprofit organizations to implement needle exchange programs .
The debate about the controversial programs came on the heels of an HIV outbreak in Southern Indiana .
The number of new HIV positive cases in Scott County in this outbreak rose past 140 .
Governor Pence declared the outbreak a public health emergency on March 26 , and at the same time approved a 30-day needle exchange program .
Pence since offered a 30-day extension as the number of HIV positive cases continued to rise .
Needle exchange programs provide clean needles in exchange for dirty needles .
The sharing of dirty needles has been linked to the outbreak .
Beyrer told the Indianapolis Star , however , that temporary measures , like the one Pence implemented on March 26 , do n't solve the long-term problem .
The HIV epidemic in Southern Indiana has been linked to a drug problem in Scott County .
HIV and Hepatitis C are blood-borne viruses that spread by way of bodily fluids and bloodstream injections , especially when more than one person is using the same needle .
Legislators on the committee responsible for Senate Bill 461 heard testimony last week before voting .
Representative Thomas Washburne , Republican , Evansville , told Wikinews on April 27 that he was involved in conversations pertaining to needle exchange programs .
`` I am inclined to follow the recommendations of the Centers for Disease Control in implementing needle exchanges , '' Washburne said in an interview with Wikinews .
`` My vote against Senate Bill 461 was not due to the needle exchanges , but other issues involved in the bill . ''
After legislators passed the bill , Pence told WISH-TV : `` From my perspective , the focus needs to be on health emergencies .
But with regard to addressing an epidemic , which is what we 've seen in Scott County , which is unprecedented in any rural part of the country .
Louisville , Kentucky , about 35 miles south of Austin , was the first Kentucky municipal government to approve a needle exchange program .
The Louisvile Metro Council voted 22 -- 0 to approve the program on April 23 .
That approval requires reconsulting the council before actually implementing such a program .
About 195 cities in the United States have adopted similar programs .
Dr. William Shaffner , a doctor and chair of the Department of Preventative Medicine at Vanderbilt University in Nashville , Tennessee , told Wikinews reporters March 25 at the University of Southern Indiana in Evansville , the day before Pence declared the public health emergency , such a program would make sense .
Allegedly , the journalists were arrested while working on a documentary critical of FIFA -LRB- International Federation of Association Football -RRB- president Sepp Blatter .
Journalist Florian Bauer tweeted yesterday , '' #Qatar 2022 ahead of new criticism .
Qatar 's controversial win of the 2022 World Cup hosting rights has been surrounded with claims of corruption among FIFA 's leadership .
FIFA held an investigation into the allegations relating to the 2018 and 2022 World Cup bids which found no major Qatari corruption , however the leader of the investigation , former US Attorney Michael J. Garcia , later claimed FIFA whitewashed the investigation 's findings .
While the investigation found ex-FIFA vice president Mohamed bin Hamman , a Qatari , had bribed officials in his 2011 FIFA presidential campaign , the report claimed these payments were not related to the Qatari World Cup bid .
It was alleged shortly after by The Sunday Times that bin Hamman secured the Qatari with illegal vote swapping .
The current New Zealand flag is partially based on the United Kingdom 's flag ; the new one would be unique to New Zealand .
The government 's Flag Consideration Project has planned a number of conferences and roadshows as part of this process , with the first meeting set to take place in Christchurch on May 16 .
According to the New Zealand Herald , Emeritus Professor John Burrows , the chairman of the project 's panel of twelve , said New Zealand 's flag has never before been open to public choice .
Professor Burrows also said resources and kits would be accessible for schools and communities , `` For example , schools can run their own flag discussions and referendums to mirror the formal process as part of their own learning exercise '' .
People were encouraged to submit their designs online at www.flag.govt.nz and suggest what the flag should mean on www.standfor.co.nz .
Names of participants would be engraved , at their option , on a flag pole monument to be built in the nation 's capital , Wellington .
New Zealand 's Prime Minister John Key said he believes redesigning the flag now has a `` strong rationale '' .
Mr Key promoted the campaign for a unique New Zealand flag on Waitangi Day -- February 6 -- this year .
The New Zealand government intends to hold two referendums to reach a verdict on the flag , at an estimated cost of NZ$ 26 million , although a recent poll found only a quarter of citizens favoured changing the flag .
The first referendum is to be held from November 20 to December 11 , selecting a single new flag design out of about four finalists .
Voters would then choose between the new flag and their current flag early in 2016 .
An 18-year-old Victorian teen accused of plotting a terrorist attack on Anzac Day applied for bail at Melbourne Magistrates ' Court on Wednesday .
It is alleged that Harun Causevic and his associate , Sedvdet Besim , also 18 , planned to run down and behead a police officer before stealing his gun to harm others at Anzac Day services in Melbourne .
It was also revealed that Mr Besim had been speaking to a 14-year-old boy in the United Kingdom over the Internet .
Agent Scott told the court that these conversations were conducted through an online voice program , and that the two spoke about planning to carry out an attack on Anzac Day .
It was alleged that Mr Causevic was an accomplice in organising the terror plot in Melbourne .
The court heard of a number of incidents where Mr Causevic 's extremist behaviours were put on show .
In one instance he was involved in a car accident in which he allegedly told the driver involved that ISIS was `` going to kill '' Australia .
It was also alleged that Mr Causevic had once spat on a police vehicle and waved an Islamic flag at officers .
During a search at Mr Causevic 's home police found weapons such as knives , a tactical vest and an Islamic flag .
Agent Scott told the court that if bail was granted , Mr Causevic could put the safety of the public and police force in danger .
The defence argued that there was no evidence to show that Mr Causevic had been in contact with the boy Mr Besim had been speaking with in the UK .
Evidence was given from some members of the Islamic Council of Victoria suggesting that Mr Causevic was capable of being guided away from extremist Islamic ideology if he is granted bail .
A tornado tore through much of the town of Van , Texas late Sunday evening .
Officials said over 40 people were transported to local hospitals for treatment and reportedly two people died during the storm -- David Tapley , a retired Garland , Texas police officer , and his wife .
The National Weather Service estimated winds over 130 miles per hour -LRB- 210 kilometres per hour -RRB- during the tornado .
Late Monday afternoon , debris was still scattered over much of the central portion of the town .
An historic building which served as the town 's first school suffered significant damage .
All classes for students were cancelled for Monday .
A 15-time Grammy winner , with over 50 albums released , King played live for nearly 70 years .
He had reportedly collapsed at a Chicago performance back in October , and blamed dehydration and exhaustion for the incident .
King recently was under hospice care at home , after being treated for diabetes and high blood pressure in hospital .
The last public statement B.B King made , according to The Sydney Morning Herald , was early this month .
Known for playing the blues on his Gibson guitar called Lucille , B.B King was admired by many musicians , including Keith Richards , Eric Clapton , Jimi Hendrix and Otis Rush .
King also collaborated with other music artists and bands .
In 1989 he played with U2 on their track `` When Love Comes to Town '' , and in the millennium , worked with Eric Clapton on `` Riding with the King '' ; which received a Grammy that same year .
Riley B King , who would eventually be called the King of Blues , grew up in Mississippi where he lived on a plantation as a sharecropper .
We 've lost the King .
Major general Fuad Basya , spokesman for the Indonesian military , said fisherman first noticed the people and a warship was deployed to retrieve them .
Myanmar is mainly Buddhist and the United Nations rates the Rohingya among the world 's most persecuted groups .
According to ABC News , Basya also believes the asylum seekers found in the water may have left the boat on purpose to be rescued to avoid being sent away from Indonesia waters .
The US State Department said John Kerry , the Secretary of State , contacted Thailand 's foreign minister over temporary housing for the Rohingya out at sea .
Jeff Rathke , the State Department Spokesperson , said , `` We urge the governments of the region to work together quickly , first and foremost , to save the lives of migrants now at sea who are in need of an immediate rescue effort '' .
Rathke also asked the governments of South East Asia not to turn away boats of people seeking asylum .
Jim Murphy yesterday announced he intends to stand down as Scottish Labour Party leader next month , after narrowly surviving a no confidence vote .
Murphy said he will present a list of suggested reforms to be made to the party , including changing the system for electing party leader to one member , one vote , upon offering his resignation at the next meeting of its national executive in June .
Murphy also said he will not stand for the Scottish Parliament election in May 2016 and will `` do something else '' .
At a meeting in the Scottish city Glasgow yesterday , the party 's national executive held a vote of no confidence in Murphy ; he won by 17 votes to 14 .
`` Today I received more support in the executive vote than I did from members of the executive when I stood for election five months ago '' , Murphy said .
Murphy became Scottish Labour leader in December 2014 , following Johann Lamont 's resignation from the role .
Until Scottish Labour holds a fresh leadership election -- its sixth in a span of eight years -- Kezia Dugdale , currently the party 's deputy leader , is to assume the role of acting leader for the time being .
Murphy cited concerns about Scottish Labour being divided as a contributory factor to his decision .
`` Scotland needs a strong Labour party ; Scotland needs a united Labour party '' , he said yesterday .
There was controversy regarding whether Murphy should retain his role following this performance .
Labour Party supporters were reportedly asked to sign a letter supporting Murphy 's leadership , to be presented at the executive meeting yesterday .
Calls for Murphy to resign came from multiple quarters , including trade unions Unite and ASLEF , as well as Labour MSPs Alex Rowley and Elaine Smith .
Earlier in the week , Unite general secretary Len McCluskey said `` the anti-Scottish card that was played by Lynton Crosby and the Conservatives '' had caused them to win a majority in the general election , before going on to say : `` I lay the blame for that very squarely at the feet of Scottish Labour .
However , trade unions USDAW and Community were amongst those supporting Murphy 's continued leadership .
In a speech , Murphy suggested he did he did not want the party to be divided as a result of his leadership .
`` It is clear that the small minority who did n't accept my election as party leader by the majority five months ago also wo n't accept the vote of the Executive today and will continue to divide the party if I remain '' , he said .
Murphy singled out McCluskey for criticism , claiming to have `` been at the centre of a campaign by the London leadership of the Unite union in blaming myself and the Scottish Labour party for the defeat of the UK Labour party in the general election .
He went on to criticise what he called McCluskey 's `` destructive behaviour '' , commenting that : `` Whether in Scotland , or in the contest to come across the UK , we can not have our leaders selected or deselected by the grudges and grievances of one prominent man .
The leader of the Scottish Labour Party does n't serve at the grace of Len McCluskey and the next leader of the UK Labour Party should not be picked by Len McCluskey . ''
Reacting to the news , SNP leader and Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon tweeted : `` I wish Jim Murphy all the very best for the future .
Scottish Liberal Democrats leader Willie Rennie said : `` Credit to -LSB- Murphy -RSB- .
Harriet Harman , the acting leader of the UK Labour Party , said Murphy had been a `` hugely important figure '' for them , adding : `` Jim has given so much to the Labour Party over the last twenty years .
Scottish Green Party co-convenor Patrick Harvie was more critical in his response , arguing the Greens should be the opposition of the Scottish Parliament instead .
Harvie said Murphy 's resignation was `` almost inevitable , but even as he announced it he promised to further weaken Labour 's relationship with the wider labour movement .
People have n't left Labour because of the trade unions , but because the party itself long ago strayed from its principles .
It 's clear that the Scottish Parliament needs an opposition that 's creative and challenging , but which can act constructively too . ''
Scottish Conservative Party leader Ruth Davidson tweeted : `` Jim Murphy announces a managed exit in order to help the party , which is to his credit .
But leaves a tough gig for whoever comes next . ''
Wikinews asked Unite the Union to comment on the story and has yet to receive a response .
Scottish Labour needs to recover , re-engage and reform .
On Sunday , at Calderón Stadium in Madrid , Spain , F.C. Barcelona association football club won the Spanish La Liga title .
The team defeated Atlético Madrid 1 -- 0 to clinch the title for the 23rd time .
A victory in this match ensured the title for Barcelona .
Uruguayan striker Suárez was rested due to a hamstring injury .
A goal scored by Messi secured the 1 -- 0 win and took the title from defending champions Atlético Madrid .
Meanwhile , multiple FIFA Ballon d'Or winner Ronaldo scored three goals against Barcelona based club Espanyol .
But his hat-trick could not fetch his club , Real Madrid , the title , since F.C. Barcelona won against Atlético Madrid .
The violence erupted at Twin Peaks Sports Bar and Grill inside a shopping mall in Waco .
The fight which included up to five biker gangs quickly escalated , resulting in a gunfire battle across two car parks .
Waco Sergeant Patrick Swanton said an argument about a parking spot may have sparked the fight .
Restaurant customers said they waited out the fight with staff locked in a freezer room .
Swanton said all but one of the deaths occurred at the scene , with the ninth in hospital .
Valls did not approve of this scheme , instead suggesting asylum seekers be spread among the nations in a more `` fair distribution '' .
The quota scheme comes amidst a large influx of refugees from the Middle East and North Africa who travel along the Mediterranean Sea .
Within the last week , almost 1000 migrants were seized in southern France near to Menton .
France has also suggested ways to stop migrants leaving their countries , including establishing a centre for migrants in Agadez , Niger .
This centre , scheduled to be operational toward the end of 2015 , is based in Niger as migrants travel through it to get to people smugglers in Libya who then transport them across the Mediterranean Sea .
Investigators looking into the Germanwings Flight 9525 crash in March announced on Wednesday that they had formally identified the 150 passengers who died on the Airbus 320 when it was flown into the French Alps .
This will allow for the victims families to prepare for a proper burial ceremony in the coming weeks .
It has reportedly taken more than six weeks to match the DNA found at the site of the crash in the French Alps with those of the family members of the victims involved .
The city prosecutor of Marseilles , Brice Robin has now said that `` The 150 death certificates can now be signed , as well as the 150 burial permits . ''
This comes after extensive investigation into the life of the 27 year old co-pilot Andreas Lubitz who had reportedly suffered depression .
After locking the cockpit door whilst the pilot was on a toilet break , Lubitz purposely flew the plane into the French Alps .
Reports from France 's BEA civil aviation investigators revealed that Lubitz had practised altering the flight 's data settings during the outbound flight to Barcelona from an altitude of 11,600 metres to an alarmingly low 30 metres .
The incident has sparked calls for other international flights to implement the rule of always having two people in the cockpit at all times during flights to prevent any further tragedies such as this .
The final report of the investigation is set to be finalised next year .
FIFA -LRB- International Federation of Association Football -RRB- president Sepp Blatter is touring the Middle East , making efforts to stop the Palestinian motion for the suspension of Israel from FIFA .
As part of his visit , Blatter met Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Tuesday , and on Wednesday was due to meet the president of the Palestinian National Authority , Mahmoud Abbas , and the chairman of the Palestinian Football Association , Jibril Rajoub .
After his meeting with the Israeli prime minister , Mr. Blatter held a press conference , in which he said Prime Minister Netanyahu was agreeable to a `` peace match '' , perhaps organized by FIFA , between the Israeli and Palestinian national teams .
Blatter also said he has n't the authority to prevent the Palestinian motion from moving forward and `` it is a very unusual and very serious matter '' .
Blatter called his efforts `` a mission of peace '' .
Recently , the Palestinian Football Association proposed to suspend Israel from FIFA accusing Israel of severely restricting the importation of sports gear , the travel of players within the territories of the PNA -- from Gaza to the West Bank and vice versa -- as well as the visits of foreign teams in Palestine thus dealing damages to Palestinian football .
The Palestinian motion reads : `` Our aim is to stop the suffering of our footballers and ensure that Palestinian football is allowed to benefit from the rights and the obligations enshrined in the FIFA statutes '' .
In response to these claims the CEO of the Israel Footballers Association , Rotem Kemer , said the accusations are n't about football and `` we do n't have any impact -LSB- ... -RSB- when it comes to security issues around the borders of Israel '' .
Should the motion go through , Israel would be suspended of all FIFA projects and activities , including the Champions League and the European Championship in 2016 .
For the motion to go through on May 29 it must win the support of 75 % of the 209 voters .
An earthquake hit close to the Solomon Islands , in the early hours of Thursday morning .
The US Geological Survey has stated that Tsunami warnings are yet to be released and that no major damage occurred .
The quake was 6.9 in magnitude and hit a depth of 19 kilometres .
American TV host David Letterman announced his retirement on Wednesday night , after a 33 year career as host of the Late Show on CBS .
His farewell included an abundance of clips from his classic skits , a few restrained fillips of sincerity and humility and sarcastic , self-deprecating humor with a tinge of nostalgia .
Over the last few weeks , a parade of celebrity guests including Tom Hanks , Julia Roberts and George Clooney paid their respects to Mr. Letterman .
Jason Alexander from Seinfeld tweeted : `` David Letterman , thank you for the laughs , both live and on air .
May your family bring you joy and inspiration and may you laugh for all your days . ''
After more than an hour of tributes and laughs , David Letterman signed off his last show yesterday night with the words : `` That 's pretty much all I got ... thank you and goodnight . ''
Taylor Swift has set a new Vevo record with her music video Bad Blood getting 20.1 million views in 24 hours this past week .
The artist took the title from Nicki Minaj who had 19.6 million views for Anaconda in August 2014 .
The video featured celebrities including Mariska Hargitay , Zendaya , Cindy Crawford , Ellen Pompeo , Lily Aldridge and more .
Selena Gomez portrays the antagonist .
Ireland by public vote on Friday legalised same-sex marriage .
This was the first time a country legalized same-sex marriage by popular vote .
The historic referendum resulted in a landslide sixty percent `` yes '' .
Over sixty percent of the nation 's electorate participated in the vote , with about two million counted on Saturday before the result was announced at Dublin Castle .
A total of 1,201,607 -- 62 percent -- of people voted `` yes '' to gay marriage , with only 734,300 -- 38 percent -- voting `` no '' .
Prime Minister Enda Kenny said , `` we have disclosed who we are .
We are a generous , compassionate , bold and joyful people who say yes to inclusion , yes to generosity , yes to love , yes to gay marriage . ''
Other political leaders also took to the media to voice their support for the decision .
Cabinet minister Leo Varadkar remarked , `` We 're the first country in the world to enshrine marriage equality in our constitution and do so by popular mandate .
The church opposes same-sex marriage .
Dublin archbishop Diarmuid Martin said Ireland 's vote is part of a `` social revolution '' .
About 2,000 LGBT supporters celebrated in the Dublin Castle courtyard on Saturday .
Drag queen Rory O'Neill , publicly known as Panti Bliss , was among the crowd , and stated `` I am drunk on Yes -LSB- ... -RSB- It 's not that Ireland has changed today , but that Ireland has confirmed the change that we already knew had happened . ''
Recently , record breaking rainfall has doled out severe destruction over much of the state of Texas , United States .
The state 's governor called the effects of the storms `` absolutely devastating '' .
At least two people died over the weekend , while twelve more were reported missing .
While both Oklahoma and Mexico have seen effects of the storms , the two killed in Texas were a girl returning from her prom and a 14 year-old boy .
A photo from The Weather Channel showed flooding at The Galleria shopping mall in Houston , preventing employees from leaving .
In the eastern part of the state , heavy rains have struck nearly every day in May , washing out patches of roadways .
Australian treasurer Joe Hockey has agreed to reconsider the Goods and Services Tax -LRB- GST -RRB- on tampons and other hygiene products after being confronted about the issue on Q&A Monday night .
Mr Hockey was responding to a question from student activist Subeta Vimalarajah .
I think so , '' Mr Hockey responded `` Should the GST be taken off them ?
`` I understand there 's long been a push to take the GST off goods , which are one way or another regarded as health products , '' Prime Minister Tony Abbott said .
`` Why did it take till Mr Hockey was asked a question on live TV for him to acknowledge this was an issue ? ''
The GST was introduced in Australia in 2000 .
The then Prime Minister John Howard said the tax on tampons was not a woman 's issue .
I could mount an argument to take the tax off old people 's clothes , I could mount an argument for a whole lot of things .
`` I believe my father was poisoned and that he was administered foreign substances , '' Williams and King said in identically worded sections of the affidavits .
Williams and King also allege that family members were prevented from visiting their father prior to his death .
The lawyer for King 's estate says the claims are ridiculous .
The coroner 's office said on Twitter that it would be a minimum of six to eight weeks before results of the autopsy are finalised .
In order for the bill to pass through Parliament , votes are not only needed from the Labor party , but also the Coalition MPs .
Tony Abbott has said it is up to the Coalition party room whether MPs will be permitted to have a conscience vote , rather than being required to vote their parties ' position .
Talking about the effect the private bill will have , along with the freedom to vote , Bill Shorten says , `` It will challenge the deeply held personal beliefs of MPs and senators on both sides of politics .
This is why Labor members have the freedom to vote their conscience , a freedom Tony Abbott is currently denying his party . ''
Iraq has started a new military operation to push back Islamic State by reclaiming the city of Ramadi , according to an Iraqi paramilitary spokesperson yesterday .
Ramadi , which is the capital of the province of Anbar , fell to Islamic State earlier this month .
The operation in the Anbar province seeks to cut off Islamic State supply routes to prepare the way for the recapture of Ramadi .
There has so far been fighting reported to the south and west of Ramadi as pro-government forces make their advance .
The U.S.-led coalition in Iraq stated it is carrying out airstrikes near Ramadi to support the Iraqi advance .
The U.S. is also supplying the Iraqi forces with military equipment , including anti-tank weaponry .
A meeting is scheduled for June 2 in Paris between representatives of countries fighting Islamic State .
John Kerry , the U.S. secretary of state , is amongst some 20 or more foreign ministers to attend ; the meeting is to focus on strategy .
In their second show at the Los Angeles Forum , U2 paid tribute to their tour manager .
According to The Guardian , in-between songs U2 's lead singer Bono reflected on Sheehan 's life to the audience , saying how he was family to the band .
Bono said , `` U2 's family -- it 's a brotherhood , although there 's a lot of sisters in it too ... but the extended family is very important to us and we look after each other .
It takes a lot to put on a show like tonight , and last night we lost a member of our family .
During the show , Bono also added , `` A lot of U2 songs over the years were written to fill a void , an absence , a hole in a heart left by a loved one .
He was discovered dead in his West Hollywood hotel room and pronounced dead from a heart attack on Wednesday morning after paramedics were called at 5:30 am local time .
According to Billboard , the paramedics found Sheehan unresponsive before pronouncing him as dead soon after .
The additional 18 year sentence means Bayley would not be eligible to apply for parole until the year 2058 .
The judge presiding over the case , Judge Pullen said , `` Your repeated violent offending and gravity of that offending provides little to offer the faintest glimmer of hope '' , as the sentence was handed down .
Senior Crown Prosecutor Peter Rose QC supported the decision made by Judge Pullen saying , `` Given the history of the prisoner Bayley , the only finding available to the court is that the prisoner represents a serious danger to the community '' .
Bayley committed rape and attempted rape at age 19 .
He was sentenced for these crimes to at least eight years in jail and was on parole in 2012 when he raped a Dutch backpacker and in 2013 raped and murdered Jill Meagher .
During the trial for the 2013 rape and murder of Jill Meagher , Bayley told the court `` They should have the death penalty for people like me -LSB- ... -RSB- How many chances does a person need ?
On Sunday , at Camp Nou Stadium in Barcelona , Spain , F.C. Barcelona won the Copa del Rey -LRB- -LRB- en -RRB- -RRB- Spanish language : King 's Cup .
The team defeated Bilbao based football club Athletic Bilbao 3 -- 1 to clinch the title .
Uruguayan striker Suárez was fit to play this final after recovering from hamstring injury .
Lionel Andrés `` Leo '' Messi Cuccittini scored 2 goals , one in each half .
And Brazilian Neymar scored 1 goal , between them putting the home team in a 3 -- 0 lead .
This lead was reduced when Bilbao born Iñaki Williams scored one goal for Athletic Bilbao , but could not defeat Barca .
U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry had a cycling accident yesterday and as a result has broken his right leg .
The accident happened near Scionzier , France ; reportedly he may have hit a curb .
As a result of the accident Kerry has canceled his official trips , including an international conference on Islamic State -LRB- ISIS -RRB- .
Kerry was taken to Geneva 's HUG medical centre by helicopter and after an X-ray examination it was confirmed his right femur is fractured .
John Kirby , a State Department spokesman , said `` The secretary is stable and never lost consciousness , his injury is not life-threatening and he is expected to make a full recovery '' .
52,000 acres of land in Dallas county were sprayed aerially Thursday evening , in an effort to kill mosquitoes and reduce the spread of the sometimes-deadly West Nile Virus .
More planes were slated to treat again on Friday .
The state as a whole has seen more than 400 confirmed instances of the illness already this year .
Each has rendered his support for the aerial action .
The mayor told media , `` I can not have any more deaths on my conscience because we did not take action '' .
However , Rawlings is reserving his statement about the treatments ' effectiveness until a later time , to allow opportunity to assess the outcomes of the treatments .
One Dallas man told reporters he made no efforts to leave his home on Friday , and turned off his home 's air conditioner , in an attempt to safeguard possible chemical threat to his family .
Dr. Roger Nasci of the Centers for Disease Control told reporters , `` It 's something new there that has not been used in quite a number of years . ''
He further stated , `` Anything novel comes with that unknown factor . ''
Due to the scope of the problem , the Texas Health Department is intervening to supervise the action and to offset costs .
The state 's Health Commissioner told media , `` This year is totally different from the experience Texas has had in the past '' .
`` If it 's nuisance mosquitoes , we ask the city or county to pay part of that .
But in the midst of this disease outbreak , it 's easier for us to go ahead and do it '' .
Several Beechcraft King Air twin-engine planes sprayed on Thursday evening .
The chemical used is synthetic pyrethroid ; a specialist participating in the action told media the planes are normally loaded with chemicals just before take off , to minimize light exposure .
Pilots were informed of certain exclusion zones , such as one containing the Preston Hollow home of former US President George W. Bush , and their flight plans factored in such information .
The commissioner for the state 's department of health services is encouraging citizens to continue applying insect spray repellant while outdoors .
Reports from Friday morning indicated no county residents had been medically treated for reactions .
The county 's judge told media he had n't expected any medical reactions to the chemicals used .
East Dallas residents were reported that morning in ordinary outdoor exercise activities .
Officials with the US Marine Corps have announced their investigation into the fatal crash of a Bell Boeing V-22 Osprey transport plane on April 11 has found pilot error was to blame .
The probe found two marines died after the pilots lost control in a tailwind in Morocco .
The accident has triggered attention from Japanese media ahead of a planned deployment there , and officials at a press conference Friday were keen to stress no mechanical or structural defects were found .
The pilots had opted for an unplanned 180-degree turn to avoid flying low over obstructions including people and vehicles .
This wind tilted the plane forward , but the pilots did not realise and began rolling the engines forward .
The Osprey had been flying in helicopter mode , with the rotors pointed skywards ; by pointing them forwards , it can be operated as a standard aircraft .
Normal flight rules call for the aircraft being level , not tilted , when this switch is made .
`` It 's an extraordinarily complex set of circumstances that caused this to happen '' , he told reporters Friday .
Wikinews spoke to several residents of the US state of Texas finding varying opinions , and responses , to the threat from the West Nile virus ; this , in contrast to the troubling media reports released recently .
The state as a whole has seen more than 400 confirmed instances of the illness so-far this year .
A Longview woman , said , '' -LSB- ... -RSB- It 's terrifying .
The woman was quick to point out a virus-related death occured in her city the same day .
The Director of Nursing for a large encampment located near Tyler said their operation had seen no cases of the illness , despite serving over 19,000 campers this summer .
Her staff took no special precautions during August .
Although having some worries , Jimmy Philmont , 39 , of Fairfield told Wikinews , '' -LSB- ... -RSB- I do n't let it keep me up at night .
Asked if he was aware of recent virus-related deaths in Texas , Philmont said , `` Yeah , I am .
Earlier in the month , Tim Whitley , a city official in Malakoff , told Wikinews his city had began using a pesticide specialist to spray twice-weekly .
Whitley explained two treatments per week is more often than usual for the city , `` With the concerns in Dallas , we 're taking it seriously '' , he said .
A nurse at a senior activity center in Austin told media she 'd taken time to educate their facility 's clients about the virus and proper precautions ; Adding , `` They feel less alarmed and we try to protect our folks here -LSB- ... -RSB- '' .
Mark Kitsmore , 54 , of Tyler said , `` Honestly , I 'm not too worried about it . ''
He jokingly commented , `` I 've probably used a little more bug spray over the past few weeks , though . ''
Twenty-six people have died so-far this year as result of having contracted the virus , approximately half occurring in Texas .
The mayor and county judge in Dallas have declared a state of emergency in response to the virus .
Witnesses heard gunshots in a Wal-Mart parking lot in Cedar Park , Texas , near Highway 183 , on Sunday morning .
Police arrested eighteen year-old Soloman Onwukaife at the scene .
Four , including the gunman who had facial wounds unrelated to the shooting , are being treated for injuries after the incident .
Cedar Park Police Captain Mike Harmon said authorities arrived at the parking lot around 4:30 AM local time .
There they arrested Onwukaife , who has been charged with aggravated assault with a deadly weapon .
The Cedar Park Wal-Mart was closed down briefly on Sunday morning ; however , no staff or customers were injured .
Police have released the names of the victims , eighteen-year-old Cody McGrath , nineteen-year-old Shayne Davis , nineteen-year-old Zacharia Gietl and 22-year-old Leland McGlocklin .
As-of Monday , Gietl has been released from hospital whilst the others remain in critical , but stable , condition .
Police informed media the incident occurred follwing a dispute which began at a nearby party where alcohol was being served .
After moving the fight to the parking lot , Onwukaife is alleged to have shot the four victims .
Onwukaife was expected to be released on Monday , after which he would immediately be jailed .
Police advised media the investigation is on-going and more charges may still be filed .
Specifically , Police are trying to determine if any other participants in the fight were armed .
Thousands of Australians lined George Street , the city 's original high street , and in front of Town Hall .
At the ceremony welcoming the atheletes home , Lauren Jackson received the key to the city , silver medallist Jessica Fox received a plaque from the Premier of New South Wales , Barry O'Farrell , and Libby Trickett reaffirmed her passion and desire to compete in the 2016 Summer Olympic Games .
Meles Zenawi , the Prime Minister of Ethiopia , died this week on Monday at the age of 57 years of an undisclosed illness at a Brussels hospital .
This came after months of speculation about the health of the Ethiopian leader after he missed several high profile meetings in the last month .
An Ethiopian government official reported a week prior to his death that Meles Zenawi was recovering well from his illness .
Ethiopia 's economy was transformed under Zenawi 's leadership to place it to among the Africa 's fastest growing with the Prime Minister serving as a key ally to the United States in fighting terrorism .
During his time as head of state , several social , economic , religious and political developments and systems were established for the first time in Ethiopia .
Earlier today , at a ceremony in Wales ' Cardiff Castle , the Australian Paralympic Committee announced the selection of wheelchair rugby player Greg Smith as Australian flag-bearer during the opening of the 2012 Summer Paralympics .
Over 260 members of Australia 's 305-strong Paralympic team attended the announcement of Smith as flag-bearer .
Multiple gold , silver and bronze medallist , Smith has represented Australia in multiple Paralympic Games in two different sports : 1992 , 1996 and 2000 saw him compete in athletics ; 2004 and 2008 were the games where he switched to wheelchair rugby .
The Australian Paralympic Committee quoted Smith saying of this honor , `` I remember in Barcelona in 1992 at my first Games when the flag bearer was announced .
I just remember that feeling of how proud you 'd be if you were given such an honour . ''
Congressman Todd Akin is facing pressure from fellow Republicans to drop out of the United States Senate election in Missouri after he made controversial comments about abortion in cases of rape .
If he withdraws by 5 p.m. central time -LRB- 1100 UTC -RRB- today , the Missouri state Republican party would have 28 days until it would require a court order to replace his name on the ballot .
In an interview with the St. Louis television station KTVI-TV on Sunday , Akin said : `` Well you know , people always want to try to make that as one of those things , well how do you , how do you slice this particularly tough sort of ethical question .
First of all , from what I understand from doctors , that 's really rare .
If it 's a legitimate rape , the female body has ways to try to shut that whole thing down .
Akin 's comments soon gained national notoriety , with numerous politicians condemning his comments .
Senators Scott Brown of Massachusetts and Ron Johnson of Wisconsin have both called for him to drop out of the race .
Presidential candidate Mitt Romney said Akin 's comments were `` inexcusable '' .
President Barack Obama said in a press conference on Monday , '' ... We should n't have a bunch of politicians , a majority of whom are men , making health care decisions on behalf of women . ''
The National Republican Senatorial committee has said it will no longer fund Akin 's campaign , regardless if he drops out or not .
Other groups who support Akin are considering stopping all campaigning in Missouri .
Yesterday , 1964 Summer Paralympic swimmer Trevor French died .
News of his death was shared with Wikinews through the Australian Tax Office and Tony Naar of the Australian Paralympic Committee .
His legacy of participation can be seen in the upcoming 2012 Summer Paralympics in London .
Australia are sending 161 athletes to the Paralympics this year .
The Paralympic team is expected to finish the Games having earned the country 's one thousandth medal .
Although Mahlungu is black , the court found the crime was not racist .
Court and prosecution instead agreed a fight erupted as part of a pay dispute .
Terre'Blanche , 69 , was co-founder of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement -LRB- AWB -RRB- , which conducted bombings in the run-up to elections that ended apartheid in 1994 .
AWB protestors hung an effigy of Mahlungu from a noose and dragged it behind a truck outside the court , while the AWB marching band struck up Afrikaans songs .
Mahlungu supporters sang in support of the convict and also chanted the banned song Shoot the Boer , which originated as an anti-apartheid protest .
Judge John Horn rejected the defendant 's claim of self defence , saying Mahlungu showed a `` flagrant disregard for the deceased 's right to life '' when he beat Terre'Blanche with a pipe .
He also rejected a claim Mahlunga , 30 , had been raped by Terre'Blanche and had contracted HIV as a result .
Mahlunga has said he did nothing wrong and Judge Horn said he `` failed to express genuine remorse '' .
Judge Horn also heard Mahlunga is of limited intelligence and was paid little for his work .
His lawyer said he was upset at having not been paid , and drunk , when he killed Terre'Blanche .
Nonetheless , the judge concluded there was `` no valid reason to deviate from the prescribed sentence '' .
Patrick Ndlovu , 18 , was charged alongside Mahlunga but acquitted of murder and robbery .
Ndlovu received a suspended sentence for housebreaking .
The Games are Kompaon 's second , having competed at the 2008 Summer Paralympics where he earned his country 's first Paralympic medal when he finished second in the 100 metre event .
Harabe , only the tenth person ever to represent his country at the Games , is making his Paralympic Games debut .
The 2012 Games will be the fourth time the country has participated , with the three other appearances happening at the 1984 Summer Paralympics , 2000 Summer Paralympics and 2008 Summer Paralympics .
Other members of the Papua New Guinea 2012 Paralympic delegation include PNG Paralympic Committee President Bernard Chan ; Chef de Mission Dr. Kefu Ma ; team manager Rosemary Mawe ; Davina Chan , the president 's wife ; coach William McKenny ; and official Jeffrey Robby .
London , England -- When Mohamed Kamara enters the Olympic Stadium during the 2012 Summer Paralympics Opening Ceremony on Wednesday night representing Sierra Leone , he will become only the second Paralympic competitor to ever represent his country .
Sierra Leone 's previous Paralympic appearance came at the 1996 Summer Paralympics when the country as represented by Marah Kelley , a javelin thrower who remains the only female to have ever represented the country at the Paralympics .
Kamara , a T46 classified athletics competitor , is scheduled to race in the men 's 100 and 200 metre events in London .
The 200 meters is scheduled for next Saturday and Sunday , the third and fourth days of Paralympic competition , and the 100 meter event is to happen on September 6 .
The Paralympic Village officially opened on Wednesday in London , with many nations having moved in as of Saturday in preparation for the start of the games .
Press access has been limited , as Paralympic Games organisers are trying to give competitors as much privacy in the village as possible .
Former American astronaut Neil Armstrong has died at the age of 82 , due to complications following heart bypass surgery earlier this month .
He is known as the first person to walk on the moon when commander of Apollo 11 , the first manned mission to land on the moon .
Armstrong was born on August 5 , 1930 in Wapakoneta , Ohio .
On March 16 , 1966 , he became the first American civilian to orbit Earth whilst onboard Gemini VIII with crewmate Davis R. Scott .
Following Gemini VIII 's docking with another spacecraft in orbit , it began tumbling out of control due to a faulty thruster .
Armstrong used an emergency set of thrusters to regain control ; Gemini VIII then landed in the Pacific Ocean after ten hours of flight .
Apollo 11 launched on July 16 , 1969 , with Armstrong and crewmates Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins .
Whilst Collins stayed in lunar orbit , Armstrong and Aldrin landed on the moon on July 20 ; On touchdown , Armstrong said : `` Tranquility Base here .
Upon stepping on to the surface of the Moon on July 20 , 1969 , he famously said , `` That 's one small step for -LSB- a -RSB- man , one giant leap for mankind . ''
The landing , and subsequent moonwalk , was watched by half a billion people around the world .
Armstrong and Aldrin spent approximately two hours walking on the lunar surface before lifting off for Apollo 11 's return to Earth on July 24 .
Armstrong later spent a few years as a NASA manager .
Also teaching engineering at the University of Cincinnati , he was appointed to panels investigating the Apollo 13 and Challenger disasters .
Academic journal Science published research this week claiming that modern Indo-European languages originated in Turkey , around 9,000 years ago .
Over 400 languages , spoken by in excess of 3 billion people , are traced back to Anatolia , now part of modern-day Turkey .
The paper , `` Mapping the Origins and Expansion of the Indo-European Language Family '' , contradicts the established view that the Indo-European group of languages originated in the Pontic steppes of south-west Russia around 6,000 years ago .
Researchers used techniques originally developed to track the spread of viral epidemics to give new insights into the development of languages .
They say that `` Both the inferred timing and root location of the Indo-European language trees fit with an agricultural expansion from Anatolia beginning 8,000 to 9,500 years ago . ''
According to the team 's athletics coaches in a conversation with Wikinews , the runners have been well prepared and have international experience that has prepared them for the Games , having won eleven medals at the 2011 IPC World Championships , eight of which were gold .
The coaches believe their runners should easily defeat their African counterparts from Nigeria and Kenya .
The team is comprised of 17 male competitors and six female competitors .
Athletics events commence on Thursday .
It , along with the adjacent Village Services Centre , is designed to be converted into a school after the games conclude .
Rooms have been structured as a gym , an auditorium , and science laboratories .
Gym equipment is supplied by Technogym , an Italian firm that has supplied gym equipment for the Olympics since 2000 .
Equipment has been provided not just for for the Fitness Centre , but for gyms at all the Olympic venues .
The newest equipment is oriented toward maximum flexibility , allowing athletes to exercise the particular muscles that they most require for their sport .
In addition to the equipment , the Fitness Centre also provides instructors trained in the use of the equipment , the likes of which athletes from many countries have never seen before .
The comments , live on television , were the first time that senior Iranian sources have admitted that the sanctions are having any effect .
They include financial restrictions and a ban by the European Union on the export of crude oil , from which the Iranian economy receives 80 % of its foreign income .
In its most recent monthly report , OPEC said exports of crude had fallen to their lowest level for two decades at 2.8 million barrels per day .
Among the steps Iran has taken to circumvent sanctions is the reflagging of tankers , first to Cyprus and Malta and , more recently , to Tuvalu and Tanzania to mask their origins and allow continued oil exports .
In August , the shipping registries of Tuvalu and Tanzania agreed to de-register Iranian ships following pressure from U.S. lawmakers .
Howard Berman , the senior Democratic Party politician on the House Foreign Affairs Committee , commented then : `` Iran is learning the hard way that we will not relent in applying crippling sanctions on the regime , and others are learning that evading international sanctions is a losing strategy '' .
As of 5:00 pm EDT , Miami area winds were measuring at 60 miles per hour .
Authorities indicated 5,180 homes across Broward county are without electricity .
According to media sources , the governor of Louisiana anticipates giving evacuation orders as early as Monday morning .
Hurricane warnings have been issued in the Florida Panhandle , sweeping as far west as Louisiana .
Sunday afternoon , Louisiana 's Governor Jindal issued a state of emergency for the state .
Over 450 flights at Miami International Airport were canceled this weekend , in light of the storm 's arrival .
Ultimately , the storm 's winds could reach as high as 110 mph , according to sources .
The mayor of New Orleans told media that many residents there are nervous .
The last time a hurricane struck the Gulf coast was in 2008 .
By yesterday , with only a few days left before the start of the 2012 Summer Paralympics , the Australian team had made themselves at home inside the Paralympic Village with uniquely Australian symbols including the emu and kangaroo .
London , England -- Yesterday , the International Paralympic Committee -LRB- IPC -RRB- held their first formal press conference as part of the 2012 Summer Paralympics .
Approximately 60 media representatives attended and had the opportunity to ask questions of Craig Spence , IPC President Philip Craven , Chairman of the London Organizing Committee of the Olympic and Paralymic Games -LRB- LOCOG -RRB- Sebastian Coe , and LOCOG Director of Communications and Public Affairs Jackie Brock-Doyle following a short speech on the history of the Paralympic Games .
The reporters asked a variety of questions .
A British journalist asked about having ATOS as a sponsor given the negative history the business has had with disability services in the country .
The IPC responded by saying this is an issue that should be taken up by the relevant British government agency .
A Wikinews reporter asked if the high cost of technology for participating in disability sport at the elite level would leave Oceania , Asia , and Africa behind .
Craven said historically , the IPC has worked on increasing disability sport participation ; they were now working on changing that to developing disability sport around the world .
He highlighted efforts by the IPC to bring down the cost of wheelchairs and prostheses as these are sporting equipment for participation in disability sport .
He also said they had donated 4,000 wheelchairs to help spread disability sport .
A Canadian journalist from the Vancouver Sun asked about the lack of substantial coverage of the Games in North America .
Craven responded by saying he was disappointed by United States coverage and the IPC has been aware of the problem for years .
He contrasted the situation in the United States with France , where the public successfully put pressure on the rights-holding network to improve the coverage of the Games .
Another reporter asked about Paralympic social media usage during the Games .
Craven responded that while not a big user of it himself , the IPC embraced social media .
Spence said the IPC encouraged everyone involved to use it ; 47 Paralympians have video blogs , and the Opening Ceremonies will be covered while they happen .
Also based at the MPC , the US Paralympics delegation opted to go paperless .
Instead , they made their media guide available online , with plans to release it on a USB flash drive at a later date .
The MPC-based Brazilian Paralympic Committee were the only National Committee on-site providing a paper media guide .
The Australian Paralympic Committee -LRB- APC -RRB- chose to be based off-site in the Novotel , Tower Bridge .
According to APC representative Tony Naar , they have close relationships with all the media organizations who sent reporters to London , this justifying their decision to be located away from the Games site .
The APC provides both an English-language paper media guide and an online one .
Côte d'Ivoire is fielding four competitors in-all ; Addoh Kimou and Kouame Jean-luc Noumbo are to represent their country in athletics , Kimou competing in the men 's T46 200 and 400 metre events , Noumbo in the men 's T46 100 and 200 metres .
Powerlifters Alidou Diamoutene and Carine Cynthia Amandine Tchei round out the country 's delegation , with Diamoutene competing in the men 's 52kg event and Tchei in the women 's 67.50 kg event .
Last Saturday , Maria Lourdes Sereno was appointed as Chief Justice Supreme Court in the Philippines , becoming the first woman to hold the post .
She replaced Renato Corona , who was impeached last May .
Philippine President Benigno Aquino III formally appointed the 52-year-old Sereno Saturday morning .
With the post having a retirement age of 70 , it is expected to see her serve one of the longest terms for the office .
Born on July 2 , 1960 in Manila , Sereno previously served as a legal consultant for the United Nations , the World Bank , the US Agency for International Development , and the Asian Institute of Management Policy Center .
The Espiritu Santo based Houssimoli will compete in the men 's T37 classification running in the 100m , 200m and 400m events .
Athletics at the 2012 Summer Paralympics start on Thursday .
London , England -- Tuesday , the Canadian Paralympic Committee held its first press conference for the Games , with the Chef de Mission , flag bearer , a first time Paralympian , and a four time wheelchair racer talking about where Canada is likely to earn medals .
The Canadians also discussed how the movement in the country has grown since the 2010 Winter Paralympics and increases in government spending on Paralympic sport .
London , England -- Yesterday , with less than a day before the start of the 2012 Summer Paralympics , the Turkey men 's national wheelchair basketball team practiced at the Basketball Arena in London 's Olympic Park .
Turkey 's campaign starts on Thursday in a game against the United States men 's national wheelchair basketball team .
London , England -- At the International Paralympic Committee -LRB- IPC -RRB- press conference Monday , Sir Philip Craven indicated the goal of the IPC is to grow disability sport globally .
At the same time , according to Paul Bird of the Oceania Paralympic Committee , the Micronesian of Oceania has been left completely behind by the Paralympic movement .
According to a member of the Oceania Paralympic Committee , the IPC recognizes fewer countries than the International Olympic Committee , with IPC rules prohibiting countries from becoming full members of the organization if their independence is not clear .
This rule dates back to the organization 's founding and no serious attempts have been made to change it since .
As many Micronesian countries are not viewed as independent countries , they can not join .
This includes Guam , the Federated States of Micronesia , the Marshall Islands , Palau , and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands .
London , England -- Yesterday , with less than a day before the start of the 2012 Summer Paralympics , Paralympic cyclists spent time training at London 's Olympic Park Velodrome .
Cycling on the track starts on Thursday .
Romney reached the required 1,144 vote threshold needed to win the Republican nomination at about 5:40 PM EDT yesterday evening when the New Jersey delegation cast its 50 votes in support .
The official nomination of Romney is the conclusion of the Republican presidential nomination process , which began with the Iowa caucuses on January 3 .
Romney first ran for the Republican nomination in 2008 , losing in the nominating process to John McCain , who was defeated in the presidential election by , the current President , Barack Obama .
The Philippine economy grew by 5.9 % , annual rate , during the second quarter of 2012 which is less than the first quarter 's figure of more than 6 % annual rate , as reported by The Associated Press .
According to Economic Planning Secretary Arsenio Balisacan , strong domestic demand from the services sector and spending from money remitted by expatriate Filipinos helped boost the nation 's economy despite the ongoing global economic crisis .
In spite of this growth , numerous risks still lurk around the corner , said Balisacan .
Balsican also noted that poor infrastructure may also have a negative impact although spending on infrastructure , which may cost nearly $ 200 million in investment , may contribute to growth .
The Philippines central bank has cut key interest rates three times already this year in order to continue this economic expansion .
Analysts , such as economist Eugene Leow of Singapore-based DBS bank , agree that , `` There is definitely room to further cut rates if needed , '' in order to promote further growth .
Lundy is expected to be in London for the entire Paralympics , and is scheduled to watch athletics , cycling , powerlifting , rowing , swimming , wheelchair rugby , basketball and tennis .
Whilst here , she is to obtain feedback from the Australian Paralympic community regarding government support of sport for the disabled .
Cuiping Zhang of China won gold with a final score of 500.9 which set a new world record .
Manuela Schmermund of Germany took home silver with a score of 493.6 .
Yunri Lee of South Korea finished fourth with a score of 492.3 , beating fifth place finisher Thai Wasana Keatjaratkul who had the same score .
Australia 's Libby Kosmala , who at 70 years old was competing in her eleventh Paralympic Games , finished eighth with a score of 488.7 , several points behind the leaders .
Two scores in the 8 range kept her out of the top through all ten rounds .
The B2 classified Algerian Mohamed Mokrane led his team in scoring , with two points .
From Chlef , he captains a side that qualified by winning the 2011 Africa Oceania Regional Championships in Sydney , Australia .
His team comes into the Games having finished sixth at last year 's World Championships .
London , England -- Last night at London 's Paralympic Basketball Arena , the Brazil women 's national wheelchair basketball team kept it close in a game with the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team before losing 52 -- 50 to Australia .
Brazil trailed by four with 32.3 seconds left in the game , narrowed the gap to two points with 1.3 seconds left but were unable to score in the final second .
4.5 point player Lia Maria Soares Martin dominated for Brazil , scoring over half the team 's points with 27 total .
She led her team on defense with half the team 's rebounds , pulling down 14 of them .
The Belém native 24 year old who will celebrate her 25th birthday during the Paralympics plays club basketball for All Star Rodas , Belem .
Brazil played aggressive basketball , with five players earning personal fouls including Soares Martin with 4 , Debora Crislina Guimaraes de Costa and Lucicleia da Costa e Costa with 3 each , and Cleonete de Nazare Santos and Cintia Mariana Lopes de Carvalho with 1 each .
The Brazilians pinched Australian players several times by trying to force them to go over their wheelchairs and lose their balance .
Sportsmanship was still on display , with the Brazilians helping to set Australia 's Kylie Gauci upright after Gauci 's wheelchair tipped over .
Brazil competed in the 2008 Summer Paralympics where they did not win a single match .
The scores were tied fifteen times and at no point were the Australians more than five points in front .
A couple of minutes into the final quarter the 45 -- 43 with Cobi Crispin sent to the free throw line where she extended her team 's lead to 47 -- 43 .
Brazil then struck back scoring five unanswered points to tie the score again at 48 -- 48 but Amber Merritt then scored one from the paint to put the Gliders back in front .
She followed this by taking a rebound and another great shot to make it 52 -- 48 .
Time ran out , and the Gliders ran out the winners , 52 -- 50 .
Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi strongly backed the Syrian rebels Thursday in a speech at the Non-Aligned Movement Summit in Iran .
Morsi , a Sunni Muslim and member of the Muslim Brotherhood , is the first Egyptian leader in 30 years to visit Iran -- an ally of Syrian Prime Minister Bashar al-Assad 's Shi'ite dominated regime .
In a strongly worded speech , which caused Syrian foreign minister Walid al Muallem to walk out in protest , Morsi called the Syrian regime `` oppressive '' , saying that it has lost legitimacy .
Delegates were told , '' -LSB- t -RSB- he bloodshed in Syria is our responsibility on all our shoulders and we have to know that the bloodshed can not stop without effective interference from all of us . ''
Morsi 's speech was viewed by commentators as a direct rebuke to Iran and a message that they had chosen the wrong side in the Syrian conflict .
The speech also allayed fears in the west that his attendance at a meeting of non-aligned countries indicated a change in Egyptian foreign policy to a less pro-Western stance .
Peaquonnock-based coach Simon is a B3-classified competitor who competes for the Kokushikai club in the United States .
In contrast , these are the third Games for the B2-classified Herrer , who competed in the 63kg class in in the 2004 Athens Games and the 57kg event in Beijing , earning a pair of bronze medals .
London , England -- Great Britain 's Dan Powell was pinned by Germany 's Matthias Krieger in his preliminary round of sixteen match in the men 's 81kg judo event at London 's ExCeL North Arena today .
As Powell entered the arena , the British fans greeted him with loud applause .
During the match , the competitors moved off the mat several times .
At one point , a judge jumped from his chair and moved it to avoid the pair .
The match had several delays as Powell first adjusted the tape on his feet .
Later , the match was stopped again to address the tape on his feet .
Krieger earned several points before securing his eventual victory for a score of 112-0 .
Going into the match , Powell 's best performance was a second place finish at the 2009 Junior World Games .
In contrast , the Kiangsu-based Zhou is the defending gold medalist in the Women 's Singles Class 4 event and Women 's Team Classes 4 -- 5 event .
Dolinar 's next scheduled match is in the Women 's Team Cl 4 -- 5 Quarterfinal 3 where Slovenia is to take on South Korea .
Zhou 's next scheduled match is on Wednesday in the Women 's Team Cl 4 -- 5 Quarterfinal 1 against a team to be determined .
London , England -- Last Friday , Wikinews interviewed Trischa Zorn , 55-time medal-winner .
The U.S. Paralympic swimmer 's haul includes 41 golds .
TZ : They had the three categories , but they were n't like S categories now .
They would like everybody to be all one and use a points system .
The rest are all functionality based .
She had multiple world records as an S7 and two days before she was supposed to comes here the IPC says : `` We want to reclassify you .
Even though she had medical documentation to say that she was a T10 paraplegic with no function in her legs .
There have been people that I swam against in the past that two years later were disqualified .
Because , as an athlete , you go in and somebody says : `` Can you see this ? ''
I actually see some of the veterans like Brad that have come back lately , and how they have come through Walter Reed .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- One of the criticisms of the US Paralympic Committee , and I do n't want to get you in trouble , is that the reason that the US is having problems right now with funding support is that they have been focused on veterans , and ignoring other people with disabilities .
TZ : Well I think that anything in the US that deals with veterans , the US is very passionate about , and sports , unfortunately , amateur sports , have become a business .
And any kind of funding through the Department of Defense , going for veterans and whatever programs they are involved in is very important .
But , as I 've always said , funds always end up drying up .
They 're not always going to be there , so you ca n't depend strictly on that .
TZ : It 's funny , I look and I see what the Paralympic athletes get now , and what we even got in '08 compared to when I first came .
And then people argue about prize money , and sponsorship .
So each games has built on certain things .
'92 was the first time that we were able to actually hear our national anthem , because before you did n't , you just heard a games recording .
And then , in 2000 in Sydney , things had become ... we were the first - there were four of us - we were able to train at an Olympic training centre .
Zorn discussed a variety of issues , including frustration with the classification system that has disadvantaged some United States swimmers because of what she sees as its subjective nature .
She also talked about the increased visibility of the Games , how things have changed from when she started in 1980 to the current 2012 Summer Paralympics .
Zorn discussed how sponsorship has evolved from her early time participating , and issues with the Paralympics inside the United States at the present .
In Australia , Evan O'Hanlon , he 's an athlete , he has cerebral palsy , her covers his shoes with tape , because he feels that he is advertising for whoever makes his shoes , and he feels that he should get sponsorship .
Do you think that we have reached the point with disability sports on the world stage where the elite athletes should be sponsored ?
TZ : Well I think that there are certain talented athletes in the US that are now getting the global sponsors such as Jessica Long being a Visa athlete and having opportunities with Coke .
And those big companies are jumpingon board and seeing the opportunities not just from a marketing standpoint , but you are allowing the young athletes to see that and touch it , and before it was n't .
I mean you are basically competing because you love the sport .
Now , granted , Paralympic athletes do n't get $ 50,000 for a gold medal , or $ 10,000 for a bronze .
I trained alongside able bodied athletes in the club setting where I trained , and a college setting .
My club coach left the club and went to the college level .
I was the first physically disabled athlete to get a full Division One scholarship .
In the US we do n't typically stereotype Paralympic athletes as the Australians or the Europeans do , and especially if you do n't look disabled .
If you put me next to Jessica Long , she 's an incredible athlete but her story is going to be more desirable , because her disability is more noticeable .
And Ellie Cole walked in and they announced : `` Ladies and gentlemen , this is Ellie Cole ! ''
These Olympians applauded Ellie Cole .
This year Zorn was inducted into the International Paralympic Hall of Fame at a ceremony in London .
She currently works for the United States Department of Veterans Affairs , helping returning soldiers adjust to life as civilians .
People outside the United States ask : `` Why do n't you acknowledge them ?
A British writer was writing a book and wanted to include me , so I collated all my results and sent it to her .
London , England -- Following the second full day of competition at the 2012 Summer Paralympics , China leads the medal race with 13 gold medals and 34 medals in total .
Australia comes second with 7 gold , and the Ukraine is third with 6 gold medals .
Australia 's first medal of the Games was won in women 's standing air rifle shooting event where Natalie Smith captured a bronze medal during the first medal event of the Games .
One of Australia 's bronze medals came in athletics ' F35 -- 36 shot put event .
Kath Proudfoot originally was listed as finishing fifth , but the Australians appealed this citing errors in how her results were calculated .
Their appeal was successful , and Proudfoot came away with her second consecutive Paralympic medal in the event .
Over half the medals won by the United States came in swimming , with 7 total .
The country has earned an additional 3 in track cycling and 1 in athletics .
The declaration is in-response to Safarov 's pardon and promotion , despite the Azeri officer having been given a life sentence -- with a minimum jail term of 30 years , by Hungarian authorities in 2006 .
Safarov was found guilty of the 2004 murder of Armenian officer Gurgen Margaryan in Budapest , when both Safarov and Margaryan were attending a NATO Partnership for Peace programme .
Safarov killed Margaryan in his sleep with an axe ; the attack allegedly stemming from a desire to avenge Azeris killed during the Nagorno-Karabakh War and being mocked by Margaryan and another Armenian .
Armenian President Serzh Sarkisian declared : `` We do n't want a war , but if we have to , we will fight and win .
Historically both Armenia and Azerbaijan lay claim to some of the same territories , an issue complicated by the intermingling of ethnic populations so some areas have no clearly demarcated Azeri and Armenian border ; these potential sources of conflict remained quiescent whilst both nations were subsumed by greater powers .
However , the collapse of the Ottoman and Russian Empires in the wake of the First World War led to the Armenian -- Azerbaijani War .
With the demise of the short-lived Armenian-Azerbaijan-Georgia Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic , fighting broke out which only ended when the two nations were annexed by the expanding Soviet Union .
With the USSR 's collapse , Armenia and Azerbaijan re-emerged as independent states -- as-did old rivalries over territory .
Between 1988 and 1994 over thirty thousand people died , and a million were displaced in bitter ethnic fighting between Armenians and Azeris over the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh ; despite an Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe brokered ceasefire , no final armistice has been signed and intermittent violence between them the two states continues .
Nagorno-Karabakh remains legally part of Azerbaijan , but under effective Armenian control .
On multiple occasions president Ilham Aliyev has stated his willingness to resort to force in order to assert Azeri rule , with oil wealth tipping any local arms race in favour of Azerbaijan .
On Friday , The National Security Council of Armenia decided to break ties with Hungary during an emergency summit , describing the Hungarian actions as a `` grave mistake '' .
In turn , the Azeri ambassador was summoned by Hungary on Monday regarding the breach of Azeri assurances that Safarov would serve out the remainder of his sentence in Azerbaijan .
London , England -- Earlier today at the Greenwich Park , riding third in the Paralympic Dressage Individual Championship Test - Grade II , Grace Bowman withdrew mid-ride after a series of low scores during the event .
Prior to entering the competition ring , Bowman 's horse Kirby Park Joy was in poor form , with Bowman unable to get control of her , showing little harmony between horse and rider .
With a score of 70 % or better expected for the best competitors , Bowman started with 48.0 % on the halt salute , 44 % on the half circle and 48.7 % on the medium trot .
Things did not get better as the ride continued , with Bowman earning a 45.8 % in the reinback , 39.8 % for the circle R 8m and 37.3 % for the circle L 8m .
Shortly after this , Bowman signaled to the judges her desire to withdraw from the ride .
In the competition ring , she was frequently pulling on the reins as Kirby Park Joy was frequently tossing her head .
According to a Dutch equestrian journalist , her horse was not agreeing with her from the start .
Bowman left the field of play in tears .
Kirby Park Joy has had problems in London , with Bowman telling the media , `` She was a bit tense and did n't like the big scoreboard ahead of us , so our score was much lower than usual . ''
Australian Team Manager Sally Francis confirmed this , saying in a media release , `` Grace 's horse has had some issues with the sight screen in the arena .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Grace did well to control her during the team test and finish -LSB- Thursday -RSB- .
We 've been working very closely with her horse since to try to alleviate any stress it might be under . ''
London , England -- Yesterday at London 's Velodrome , Australia 's Jayme Paris took home bronze in the Paralympic Track Cycling Women 's Individual C1-2-3 500m Time Trial event , earning back to back bronzes in this event .
Yin He of China took gold , and Alyda Norbruis of the Netherlands won a silver .
C1 classified Paris pushed the other riders , setting a world record for her classification with a time of 45.449 seconds and factored time of 40.476 seconds .
This bettered her own world and Paralympic record she set at the 2008 Summer Paralympics with a time of 46.427 seconds .
While the Blacktown , New South Wales native was on the track , the commentator led spectators in chanting with the traditional `` Aussie-Aussie-Aussie '' , where spectators respond `` Oi-Oi-Oi '' .
There were two big Australian flags waving during the race , with fans cheering loudly in support of the Australian rider .
London , England -- The final day of rowing at the London Paralympics took place yesterday at Eton Dorney , with all the medals being decided .
China finished on top , earning two golds .
Ukraine came in second in rowing medals with a gold and a bronze , Great Britain earned a gold , France earned a pair of silver medals , Australia and Germany won a silver medal , and Belarus and Russia each won a bronze .
Coming into the AS Men Single Sculls , Tom Aggar of Great Britain was the gold medal favourite having not lost a major international competition .
Australia 's Erik Horrie claimed silver in the event despite being in the hospital 24 hours earlier .
With a close finish , Australia 's fans initially thought he won bronze .
Head took an early lead , winning the first set 11 -- 2 before going down to Kanova in the second set by 5 -- 11 .
Head kept the scoring closer in the third set at 4 -- 7 at one point , before losing 5 -- 11 .
The British fans dominated Slovakia in terms of volume , chanting `` G-B !
The Slovaks ruled the stands in terms of waving large flags .
A loud chant from Great Britain 's fans stopped abruptly after Kanova scored .
Head could not come back in the fourth set , losing 3 -- 11 and seeing Kanova take the bronze .
In the gold medal match on the main table , Austria 's Doris Mader lost to Sweden 's Anna-Carin Ahlquist , with Ahlquist receiving loud support from her teammates and coaches .
Prior to the start of the game , both team 's fans made themselves heard with Australian supporters chanting `` Aussie !
and United States fans chanting `` U-S-A !
The United States 's Jen Armbruster scored all three of the United States goals , one of them coming off a penalty shot .
The two teams played with contrasting styles .
The United States spent most of their time upright , only dropping and lunging to block the ball after the Australians threw it .
Meanwhile , the Australians spent most of their time low and close to the ground as they lunged to prevent the ball from going into the goal .
The Australians , who were all wearing green and gold socks , were louder than the United States and talked to each other more while on court .
Australia came into the match having lost 1 -- 3 to both Japan and Canada .
They have one game left to play at the London Paralympics when the play Sweden , who have lost 1 -- 5 to the United States , tied Japan 0 -- 0 and beaten Canada 2 -- 1 .
Goalball was created in 1946 as a sport exclusively for people with a visual disability and designed to help veterans returning from World War II with their rehabilitation .
Players are blindfolded to insure equal ability to see while on the court , and the game can be stopped to ensure goggles are properly fitted .
Standing in front of a long goal , they throw the ball at the opposition team 's net who in turn try to block it by hearing the ball , which contains a bell , and using their bodies to prevent the ball from going in .
London , England -- Yesterday at London 's Riverbank Arena , Brazil 's 5-a-side blind football team took on China in both teams ' final game of group play .
Brazil won 1 -- 0 , topping Group B.
After half time , the defensive game continued , although Brazil started sending another player forward .
Shortly after halftime , a mix up saw two Brazilian defenders compete for the ball , and they nearly scored an own goal .
Wang then made a spectacular shot which missed the goal .
Li Xiaoqiang and Wang pressed a series of attacks , which garnered a lot of ooohs from the crowd but nothing on the scoreboard .
Meanwhile , Brazil continued aggressively , with Marcos Jose Alves Felipe in particular looking threatening .
The Brazilian contingent in the crowd roared loudly at the final siren .
Asked how he felt to have made the semifinals , Brazil Coach Ramon Pereira de Souza said : `` I have no words .
My happiness is shaped on all the faces of the players and coaches in the team .
Both teams came into the game with similar records .
Each had one win and a draw , and were tied on goal difference .
A win would see them through to the finals .
In case of a draw , the two sides would be reduced to drawing lots .
Brazil won gold in 5-a-side football at both past Paralympic Games where it was included -- Athens in 2004 , and Beijing in 2008 where they defeated China 2 -- 1 in the final .
China won silver in Beijing even though they had no national team prior to hosting the Games there .
There were about 150 people in the crowd at the Riverbank Arena when the game began , although this swelled to over 500 after half time .
There were a number of flags on display in the crowd , including the flags of Brazil , Turkey and France , and the ubiquitous Union Flag .
The two teams had different rituals when their national anthems were played .
The Brazilians had their hands over their hearts , whereas the Chinese stood at attention and sang while theirs was played .
Five-a-side football players wear blindfolds to insure a level playing field , as some blind people are more blind than others .
However , the goalkeepers are sighted , and , like the goalkeepers in regular football , can use their hands .
When ball is in play , spectators are asked to be keep silent so the players can hear the ball , which has bells in it .
There are three guides for each team who tell players where the ball is .
The blue artificial surface -- the same used for the hockey during the Olympics -- could be slippery at times .
Occasionally the players would run into each other or the goal post .
At one point , the Brazilian goalkeeper stopped the ball with his crotch , which caused his to fall to the ground writing in pain .
The umpire cautioned him at one point but never produced any coloured cards .
Both sides played defensively , with three players back and one forward , so there was little passing but a lot of foot skill .
As a rule , the Brazilians favoured a more open style of play .
Brazil had a couple of good shots at goal that the Chinese goal keeper was lucky to stop .
China 's Wang Zhoubin also had a shot at goal that bounced off the goal post with a resounding noise .
About 21 minutes in , Brazil 's Jeferson da Conceicai Goncalves scored the first goal .
His teammates jumped all over field , and guides walked the players to the team celebration .
Winners of their group , Australia have never taken the gold in wheelchair basketball ; their opponents , Mexico , were previously ranked ninth at the opening of the tournament , so making it thus-far boosts their ranking to eighth .
Australia 's first shot at goal was taken by Bridie Kean , from the free throw line ; but , she missed both shots .
Mexico 's Lucia Vazquez Delgadillo then became the opened the scoring to give Mexico a two-point lead , their biggest of the entire game .
Seconds later , Cobo Crispin had a shot from the paint , but missed ; Kylie Gauci then finally put points on the scoreboard for the Gliders .
Mexico turned the ball over , and Cobi Crispin got her first from the paint , assisted by Kylie Gauci .
This was repeated on the next play , with Sarah Stewart providing the assist .
Mexico then scored , the Gliders responding with another shot from Cobi Crispin .
On the next play , Kylie Gauci stole the ball and charged down the court , but failed to make the shot .
Clare Nott took a defensive rebound , leading to Cobi Crispin scoring again .
Shortly thereafter , Sarah Stewart took another foul , and made both shots to bring the score to 14 points to 4 .
Mexico had great difficulty moving the ball up the court ; suffering by timing out , or being forced into long shots that missed .
But , when the same happened to the Gliders , Kylie Gauci , a two-point player , took a spectacular three point shot to take the score to 17 points to 8 in Australia 's favour .
Mexico then managed to score again before Amber Merritt came on with only three minutes left in the quarter , and missed her first shot at goal .
A second attempt , coming from a pass by Kylie Gauci , put more points on the scoreboard .
With only a few seconds remaining in the quarter , Kylie Gauci stole the ball and delivered it to Shelley Chaplin , who scored again .
The two teams went into the quarter-time break with the score 21 points to 10 .
In the opening minutes of the second quarter , Shelley Chaplin assisted Cobi Crispin , and then Amber Merritt , to add another four points .
Attempting to respond , Mexico missed two shots before scoring then , on the next play , allowed Amanda Carter to steal the ball , which led to Amber Merritt scoring again .
Australia followed this up with steals by Cobi Crispin and Amber Merritt , giving Shelley Chaplin more scoring opportunities .
Mexico scored twice ; but , Australia responded each time , with goals by Amber Merritt and Amanda Carter , who was fouled , making her 's a three-point play .
A steal led to a runaway break by Amber Merritt , bringing her contribution to ten points , and the score to 38 points to 16 .
The final quarter got off to an unimpressive start for both teams ; Australia 's Leanne del Toso missed a shot at one end , and Mexico 's Floralia Estrada Bernal missed one at the the other .
Mexico 's Rocio Torres Lopez scored in response , another shot by Sarah Stewart missed ; but , Amanda Carter took an offensive rebound , which eventually made it into the basket .
Turnovers by Bridie Kean and Leanne del Toso led Mexico putting points on the board consecutively , but successive fouls sent Bridie Kean to the free throw line to score three points .
Amber Merritt brought the score to 59 points to 35 with her seventh scoring shot .
By this point , Australia was deliberately running down the clock , passing the ball around , and taking shots at the last minute .
This led to several missed shots by Sarah Vinci and Katie Hill , with Mexico unable to capitalise on the opportunities .
Under intense Australian defensive pressure , Mexico missed shots and turned over the ball as-often as before .
With nineteen seconds of play remaining , Katie Hill took a two point shot from inside the paint ; attracting a foul , she scored another point from a free throw .
London , England -- Greece defeated Portugal on Tuesday in the boccia BC3 pairs gold medal match , by four points to one .
The Greek pair Nikolaos Pananos and Grigorios Polychronidis won three sets , and lost one , against Portugal 's Armando Costa and Luis Silva by scores of 2 -- 0 , 1 -- 0 , 1 -- 0 and 0 -- 1 .
They enjoyed enthusiastic support from Greek fans repeatedly shouting , `` Bravo ! ''
Following the Greek win , supporters broke into rhythmic clapping , continuing their flag-waving and chanting .
One of the Greeks competitors rolled his electric wheelchair around , whilst smiling and posing for photos .
Georgian-born Polychronidis holds an accounting degree from the Athens University of Economics and Business .
Pananos , who has cerebral palsy and is retired , is coached by Andreas Keramidas and plays his club boccia for ASAX Eidiki Olympiada .
Portugal qualified for this match after beating South Korea 4 -- 3 in the semi-finals .
The Greeks earned their gold medal round opportunity after beating Belgium who went through pool play undefeated .
Portugal won two of their three matches in pool play , losing one , and taking 14 points with only four scored against them .
In pool play , Greece won two matches , lost one , and took eight points versus 13 points against them .
Boccia , which is similar to lawn bowls , was first played at the 1984 Summer Paralympics .
As a Paralympic sport , it is played by people with cerebral palsy and similar locomotor conditions ; players are divided into four different classifications based upon their functional ability .
The website of international news service Al Jazeera was hacked Tuesday by a group idenitified only as Al-Rashedon .
As well as identifying the group which hacked the website in English and Arabic , the bottom left of the image also contains an Arabic language statement from the group criticising Al Jazeera for its coverage of the Syrian civil war .
When roughly translated , the message means : `` We have hacked you because your lack of support of Syrian government and militant groups backed by that government .
We 're compelled to do so on behalf of the Syrian people . ''
The site reports that some users have not been able to access the website .
London , England -- In Tuesday night 's wheelchair fencing , at London 's ExCeL North Arena 2 , men 's individual foil category B , Marco Cima of Italy faced Alim Latreche of France in the battle for the bronze .
Latreche took the medal in a closely-contested match .
The final score was 15 to 11 , with Cima leading up until the score was 5 to 4 in his favour .
At that point , Latreche took a point , tying the scores , and went ahead on the next point .
Whilst Cima was able pull the match back to a tie on both 7-7 and 8-8 , he was unable to regain the lead .
During the match , Cima incurred a yellow card .
Following his bronze medal finish , Latreche told media : `` It 's my third Paralympic Games , but it 's my first medal .
He went on to say , `` I was disappointed about my performance .
When asked about his plans following the Games , he responded : `` This bronze medal is really keeping me motivated for the rest of the Paralympic Games .
I 'm looking forward to tomorrow .
This medal is my reward for these Games but the competition does n't end here . ''
Latreche competes again on Wednesday , in the men 's individual epee event .
Fencing at the London Games ends on Saturday , with medal bouts being held every day until then .
The match was last of the four concurrent wheelchair fencing medals decided , with the crowd shouting in support of the Makowska fencer after the previous matches were concluded .
Zhou had limited crowd support , with only one large Chinese flag visible in the spectator area .
Makowska 's win came in a very closely-contested match ; The score was first tied on eleven points , and again on 12 , 13 , and 14 points before the Pole finally won .
At the London Games , Paralympic wheelchair fencing features five medal events for women and seven for men , involving several weapons including the foil , epee and sabre .
Wheelchairs used in competition are held in place using medal plates , with the fencer with shorter reach choosing the distance between the chairs .
B-classified wheelchair fencers have , according to the International Paralympic Committee , `` fair sitting balance and their fencing arm not or only minimally affected . ''
London , England -- Tuesday evening saw Zsuzsanna Krajnyak , of Hungary , take bronze in the women 's wheelchair fencing individual foil category A .
The bout was the first of four concurrent medal matches to end , with Juhasz unable to score a hit until Krajnyak had already amassed five .
Juhasz 's final hit was scored when Krajnyak was ahead with 11 hits .
The match was penalty free , despite Krajnyak rocking in her wheelchair as she parried with her opponent .
At the London Games , Paralympic wheelchair fencing features five medal events for women and sven for men , using several weapons including the foil , epee and sabre .
Whoever its going to be , we 're still going to go out there and play as hard as we can and take it to them as a team .
We also went to Arnheim in the Netherlands for a pre-tournament , and we 've trained together in Cardiff .
And then after Cardiff we came in to London ; so we 've had that time together as a team and we 're doing really well .
They 're going to come out and play as hard as they can against us and sometimes there is that odd mishap where they might smash a few spokes cause they hit us .
Before a full house at a game that was the first one to sell out in the lead up to the start of the London Paralympics , the United States national wheelchair rugby team defeated Great Britain national wheelchair rugby team by a score of 56 -- 44 .
While the game got off to a slow start for the United States , once the team found its rhythm , they dominated the home team and appeared to score at will .
Despite this , the crowd supported their side , even when they were down by eight points .
When the United States bench started a chant of U-S-A !
The United States came to London as defending gold medalists and ranked first in the world .
Coming into the game , the team 's assistant coach James Mate told the media regarding this game , `` To be truthful we have played the home team a couple of times , but you have to play the game in that moment and it can give the hosts the edge .
Ranked sixth in the world , Great Britain came to London as the home town favorites .
Their roster included club players from across the country including David Anthony who plays for the Cardiff Pirates , Andy Barrow , Bulbul Hussain and Steve Brown who play for the Kent Crusaders , Jonathan Coggan and Mandip Sehmi who play for the Stoke Mandeville Storm , Mike Kerr who plays for the North West Bulls , Myles Pearson who plays for the West Coast Crash , and the team 's only female player Kylie Grimes who plays for the London Wheelchair Rugby Club with teammate Ross Morrison .
Before the game , first time Paralympian Great Britain wheelchair rugby player Mike Kerr told the media regarding his squad selection , `` I felt I 'd never been given a chance to get noticed , so I got myself some court time at big tournaments like Knock and Roll in 2010 -LRB- a USA national tournament -RRB- and Bernd Best -LRB- the biggest wheelchair rugby tournament in the world , held in Germany -RRB- .
I played well and I think people finally took notice . ''
Regarding the wait to play , Kerr said , `` It 's hard .
Sweden , the current European champions , came to London with a relatively new coach , who only took over the side in late 2011 .
Belgium 's coach Bob Vanacker also plays on the team .
He and Peter Genyn and Lars Mertens play their club wheelchair rugby in the United States .
Australia and Canada both had their flag bearers from the opening ceremonies represented by this sport , Greg Smith for Australia and Garett Hickling for Canada .
Beijing silver medalists Australia came to London ranked second in the world .
Their last major competition before the Paralympics was the Canada Cup , where they lost to the United States by a single point .
The Australian side included flag-bearer Greg Smith at his fifth games , Nazim Erdem who is at his third Paralympics , Ryley Batt and Ryan Cott who competed at the 2004 and 2008 Games , Cameron Carr who competed at the Beijing Games , Chris Bond , Cody Meakin , Ben Newton , Andrew Harrison , Josh Hose and Jason Lees who made their Paralympic Games debut .
Canada came into their match against Australia as returning bronze medalists .
Their roster included Ian Chan who was on the team that finished first at the 2002 World Championships , the former ice hockey player Jason Crone from Owen Sound , Ontario , debut Paralympian from Embrun , Ontario Oarice Dagenais , 2002 World Champion Jared Funk from Manitoba , five time Paralympian Garett Hickling , Trevor Hirschfield who is decribed by the Canadian Paralympic Committee as one of the world 's best low point players , Athens silver medalist and Beijing bronze medalists Fabien Lavoie , eighteen-year-old Zak Madell , University of Arizona alumnist Travis Murao , 2010 World Championships All Star Ten player Patrice Simard , former recreational hockey player David Willsie and Harrow , Ontario native Mike Whitehead .
In the last match of day yesterday , Japan defeated France 65 -- 56 .
France qualified for the tournament despite the national team only being five years old .
Japan came to London having beaten the top ranked United States in this year 's Canada Cup .
The investigation was launched after the South African Paralympic Committee sent the IPC a formal letter of complaint following Oscar Pistorius raising concerns in the mixed zone following his silver medal finish in the 200 meters .
The South Africans alleged runners from other countries were cheating by being measured using one set of competition prosthetics , then using different prosthetics during the race .
The IPC sent representatives to the track to ask coaches if they were aware of changes between prosthetics being measured and being used on the track .
According to the IPC , coaches were surprised to be asked this , as it would be extremely difficult to transition between differing prosthetics due to required changes in stride .
The initial alert was based upon an evaluation of the earthquake , not on confirmation that a tsunami has been generated .
Later reports indicate the alert was cancelled , the PTWC having predicted that any wave would have reached Puerto Sandino in Nicaragua shortly before 16:00 UTC .
A 6.1-Mw quake in January 2009 , just 30km from the capital , killed at least 34 amid mudslides , falling rocks and trees .
The report alleges that the United States and Libya , together with governments from Africa , Asia , and Europe such as the United Kingdom , collaborated in detaining former members of LIFG living outside Libya then deporting them back to Libya where they were allegedly tortured .
According to the report , some of those detained where abused even before the were returned to Libya such as those held in United States military bases in Afghanistan .
News reports have revealed that the abuse may have occurred between April 2003 and April 2005 .
Upon the release of the document , Human Rights Watch has stated that their key source of information came from a pile of abandoned documents found on September 3 , 2011 from the offices of former Libyan intelligence chief Musa Kusa .
They also said that they have interviewed 14 former detainees who allege that they were subjected to abuses ranging from waterboarding , sexual assault , stress positions , beatings , and sleep deprivation .
The Convention on Domestic Workers -LRB- also known as the ILO Convention 189 -RRB- is to take effect next year after the Philippines ratified it earlier this month , according to the United Nations .
It follows the lead taken by Uruguay which ratified it earlier this year .
Only two countries are needed in order for it to take effect .
Upon taking effect , the convention is intended to protect the rights of around 53 to 100 million domestic workers around the world .
The ILO has noted that these workers work in a sector that lacks regulation and is informal .
According to the UN , the convention intends to grant the workers several rights .
These include freedom of association and collective bargaining , protection from child labor , forced labor , and discrimination .
Also included are chapters that entitles domestic workers to a contract that specifies the type of work , salary , the hours of work , paid leave , and days off .
The Samoa Paralympic Committee , she explained , with assistance from the Oceania Paralympic Committee is submitting a grant request to acquire the equipment necessary for a powerlifting program in Samoa ; equipment costs around A$ 18,000 to A$ 20,000 used , and is specifically built for paraplegic competitors who need to be strapped down when lifting .
If Samoa is successful in getting the money for the equipment , the next challenge will be finding money to cover the cost of freighting it to Samoa .
Tuala and the nation 's athletics coach have previously held raffles , run events at a golf club , and run bake sales to assist in covering costs for developing disability sport in the country and look to do it again if they can get the grant .
The last grant the International Paralympic Committee gave for the region for the equipment did not include Samoa .
According to Tuala , equipment costs are a major barrier to participation in the development of disability sport .
Samoan London Paralympian Leitu Viliamu needs a new leg as she has outgrown hers .
A high quality leg like the one worn by Oscar Pistorius can cost upwards of AUD$ 10,000 per leg .
Viliamu and fellow Samoan Paralympian Milo Toleafoa only acquired real running shoes for the first time when they arrived in London .
Saohaga 's best throw in competition was a distance of 5.23 metres .
This set a personal-best career throw for the athlete , and sees her finishing with a season 's best score of 228 .
Her efforts saw her finish ahead of several competitors including : Nephtalie Jean Louis of Haiti , Rhodah Mutale of Zambia , Madinat Abdullayeva , of Azerbaijan and Nadia Medjedj of Algeria .
After the warm-up by the Workout Wagga girls , Abbott started at the front of the pack but was quickly overtaken by the faster runners , crossing the finishing line with a time of 46 minutes 49 seconds .
After crossing the line Abbott mingled and posed for photographs with the public .
Abbott was interviewed by Master of Ceremonies Leigh Spokes ; when asked about the event , he stated that it was a `` great community event '' but found the course `` hard going '' .
Shortly after the interview and talking to people , Abbott and his advisors left the event due to his tight schedule .
An 8.8 magnitude earthquake hit Chile on Saturday , causing significant damage throughout parts of the country .
Four days after the quake , Peter Coti , also a Wikinews contributor , was able to chat with Mr. Grez about what happened Saturday morning .
-LRB- -LRB- Diego Grez -RRB- -RRB- The electricity was restored last night , after more than 3 days without radio , cellphone or TV , in a few words , without communication .
My Dad came down from the second floor and said to my Mom that it was a shake .
Outside there were many other people running to the nearest hill , called Cerro -LRB- Hill -RRB- La Cruz .
The La Cruz Hill was flooded with cars and people crying .
And the people was urinating and excreting anywhere .
The hill became very dirty .
The house moved from side to side .
After it , when we wanted to go back for cellphone , a radio and clothes -LRB- we all were in pajamas -RRB- , then some aftershocks took place .
Former Pakistani international footballer Abdul Ghafoor has died in Karachi at the age of 71 .
Makhdoom Syed Faisal Saleh Hayat , the President of the Pakistani Football Federation -LRB- PFF -RRB- released a statement after Ghafoor 's death .
Abdul Ghafoor was a kind person who will be greatly missed by all who knew him '' .
Ghafoor played his entire career in Pakistan playing for the Dhaka Mohammedan Club .
During this time Pakistan recorded victories over such nations as China and the United Arab Emirates .
London , England -- Yesterday , on the final day of competition , athletics concluded at the London Paralympics with the running and wheeling of the marathon for the men 's T12 , T46 and T54 , and the women 's T54 .
Great Britain 's gold medal was earned by David Weir , and was Weir 's fourth gold medal earned in the London .
Tatyana McFadden of the United States had a chance at four gold medals in London , but was unable to seriously compete after a pair of tire punctures mid-race that seriously slowed her down .
McFadden conveyed her experiences in the race to the media , saying , `` At 18 or 19 miles it went again , this always seems to happen to me in London .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Finishing is the most important thing for me , it makes you a better person .
Swiss racer Edith Wolf quit the women 's marathon mid-race after running into a hole on the course that left her without feeling in her left arm and neck , and required her to be hospitalized .
Following the race , Wolf 's husband and coach told the media , `` She was really looking forward to the marathon .
I think tomorrow she will wake up and see her four medals and she will be very happy . ''
When questioned about the media , some of whom disappeared at the conclusion of the men 's race , and specifically the media from Wolf 's home country , he said , `` There are not so many media here , which is disappointing .
Colombia 's German Naranjo Jaramillo served as Elkin Alonso Serena Morena 's guide for the length of the marathon .
Because of this , Jaramillo also earned a silver medal .
Gold medalist Laso of Spain and bronze medalist Zhiou of Tunisia utilized multiple guides , and the guides were not eligible for medals .
Other runners in the men 's T12 marathon who had the same guide the whole race included ninth place Ildar Pomykalov of Russia who was guided by Aleksei Lashmanov , and Henry Wanyoike of Kenya who did not finish but was guided by Joseph Gachuhi .
An investigation into Scientology and Tom Cruise which was set to air this past Friday on the American television program 20/20 was removed from broadcast by ABC News .
This is not the first time that ABC News has pulled an investigation into Scientology from airing on 20/20 .
A press release published by ABC on Thursday announced the scheduled airing of the investigation .
Ortega noted , `` Then , Friday night , ABC caved again , and this time much more publicly . ''
He highlighted a television screenshot which displays clearly the description given by ABC for the 20/20 program scheduled for Friday : `` 20/20 .
` Lovestyles of the Rich and Famous ; The Camera Never Lies ' Journalist Maureen Orth discusses her recent article in Vanity Fair on Scientology and actor Tom Cruise ; celebrity '' .
According to Ortega , this was to be a significant investigation into Scientology .
It was going to cover topics including the recent divorce of actress Katie Holmes from Tom Cruise , the role of minors within the Scientology organization , material on Scientology 's chief David Miscavige , and controversy regarding the elite Scientology group known as the Sea Org .
Ortega was himself interviewed as part of the investigation , which he was told would comprise an hour-long broadcast .
In addition to Ortega , former Scientologists Marc Headley and his wife Claire were interviewed by ABC News for the 20/20 piece which they were informed would be complemented by a news segment on Nightline .
Claire told the camera of her two mandatory abortions she experienced while a member of the Sea Org in Scientology ; Ortega reported that this interview moved the ABC television crew to tears .
Marc Headley confirmed that he had learned of the ABC News decision .
In a post Friday to a legal fund webpage he set up to support his family with litigation costs from Scientology , he commented : `` We just got word that both ABC 20/20 & Nightline have pulled the TV shows that were going to air tonight .
It appears that someone at OSA is trying to sandbag the downstats over the next few weeks . ''
OSA is an abbreviation for the Office of Special Affairs -- a department within Scientology which has been compared to an intelligence agency that handles legal affairs and public relations .
Downstat refers to a negative impact on statistics gathered by Scientology members of the Sea Org due to critical investigations of the organization by the media .
The Canadian team had no answer to Ryley Batt , who scored 37 goals .
Ryley out-paced , out-maneuvered , and out-scored his opponents .
Before the game he skylarked by riding his wheelchair on one wheel .
The commentator called him `` Houdini '' for escaping any attempt to restrain him .
Australia 's Chris Bond contributed 15 goals towards Australia 's scoreline .
Spectators included the Australian Chef de Mission , Jason Hellwig , and his deputies , Michael Hartung and Kate McLoughlin .
The team 's gold medals were presented by HRH The Earl of Wessex .
The Canadian team received flowers from Stephen Fry .
An unidentified 28-year-old man has been taken into custody after police in Northern Ireland seized a large amount of cannabis upon the planned police raid of a house in the town of Magherafelt Tuesday .
The seizure , which contained 38 kilograms -LRB- 84 pounds -RRB- of cannabis resin , reportedly had an estimated street value of # 380,000 -LRB- US$ 612,000 or $ 474,000 -RRB- .
A later police search of a vehicle also uncovered a large quantity of money .
The cannabis is to be examined by forensic investigators .
`` This seizure was as a result of information received from the public and I am extremely grateful to the community for their assistance in this investigation . ''
An official announcement stated that the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board 's inspection of the reactor pressure vessel of Unit-1 was completed and enriched uranium fuel will be loaded into the first 1000-mw-reactor this month .
This was the reason for the people to raise another protest since March this year .
The government ordered 4,000 policemen to monitor the surrounding area around the plant site .
Groups of people tried to block a road and a railway .
The protests spread to different towns and villages .
A group of scientists , doctors , environmentalists , environmental activists , students , and concerned citizens met yesterday in front of the Vidyasagar Statue in College Square , Kolkata to show solidarity with the demonstration around Kudankulam .
George Entwistle became the new Director-General of the BBC Monday .
He replaces Mark Thompson , who had held the position since 2004 .
On the BBC 's Andrew Marr Show , Thompson said Sunday the corporation was `` getting very , very close to the edge '' following recent sixteen per cent real-terms budget reductions .
The salary of Entwistle , who is scheduled to meet with programme creators and staff at the BBC this week , will reportedly be # 450,000 -LRB- US$ 730,000 or $ 560,000 -RRB- , considerably less than that of Thompson who , in his final year , made # 622,000 -LRB- US$ 1,009,000 or $ 773,000 -RRB- .
While he was in office , Thompson 's salary dropped by approximately a quarter .
`` I think -LSB- Entwistle -RSB- cares deeply about the BBC '' , said Michael Grade , once chairman of the BBC .
He further told BBC Radio 5 Live 's Stephen Nolan : `` I think he 's intelligent enough to know how difficult the job is -- some would say the job is like being Prime Minister ; it 's almost impossible .
Hailemariam was named chair of the Ethiopian People 's Revolutionary Democratic Front -LRB- EPRDF -RRB- last weekend .
The EPRDF currently controls Ethiopia 's parliament .
Ethiopia has been perceived as an east African ally of the U.S. on security issues .
Hailemariam has said he would continue his predecessor 's `` legacy without any change '' .
In addition , David Shinn , the U.S. ambassador to Ethiopia from 1996 to 1999 , has agreed that it is likely U.S. -- Ethiopia relations will not change greatly with Hailemariam as prime minister .
Strathclyde Police have arrested a 19-year-old man in relation to a reported incident of a boy , aged four , being sexually assaulted in the toilet of an Asda supermarket in the town of Clydebank in West Dunbartonshire , Scotland .
The suspect is being held in police custody and has an appearance scheduled for Tuesday at Dumbarton Sheriff Court .
Police were initially alerted to the incident at 31 Britannia Way in Clydebank approximately 1355 BST -LRB- 1255 UTC -RRB- Tuesday .
According to Sky News , the boy 's mother had given him permission to enter the toilet by himself as she waited outside .
Police said the incident took place in the minutes following the boy 's entrance into the toilet ; upon his departure , the boy raised the alert .
Police said that they had taken one whole day to interview the child and an additional day to have initial investigations into the incident .
All supermarket staff have been questioned and CCTV video has been examined .
`` We have taken this report very seriously '' , said a spokeswoman for Asda .
Friday saw U.S. President Barack Obama issue a proclamation making the south-western Colorado site of Chimney Rock a national monument .
This the third national monument Obama has created , without an Act of Congress , using authority granted to the President under the 1906 Antiquities Act .
As the newest of country 's 103 national monuments , Chimney Rock consists of the 4,726-acre -LRB- 19 km2 -RRB- Chimney Rock Archaeological Area of San Juan National Forest in Archuleta County , Colorado .
In Friday 's proclamation , Obama said the site `` incorporates spiritual , historical , and scientific resources of great value and significance '' .
U.S. Representative Scott Tipton introduced House Bill 2611 last year , attempting to designate the area a national monument ; his bill passed in the House of Representatives , but stalled over election-year politics in the Senate .
Fiscal conservatives in the Senate blocked the measure , fearing it could increase administrative costs .
Supporters insist any additional costs would be negligible .
The President 's action has met with bipartisan support from within the swing state of Colorado ; although national Republican leaders have criticised presidential use of the 1906 act , citing concerns that where mineral , or fossil fuel , resources may be present such action `` locks them up '' .
Critics charge no such voter fraud has been shown and the real reason behind voter ID laws is the disenfranchisement of minority and poor voters .
Pennsylvania House Majority Leader Mike Turzai told his fellow Republicans the voter ID law was `` going to allow Governor Romney to win the state of Pennsylvania '' .
The decision of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court instructed the lower court to consider whether , regardless of the possible constitutionality of the law in the long term , it may be impossible to implement it for this fall 's election without disenfranchising voters who do not yet have the required ID .
Two out of six Supreme Court justices said there was no need for the lower court to consider this because disenfranchisement would obviously occur .
Daryl Metcalfe , a Republican state representative from Butler County , Pennsylvania , who sponsored the voter ID bill said in a radio interview Wednesday that those unable to get identification documents are `` lazy '' : `` we have 40-something percent of the people that are living off the public dole , living off of their neighbor 's hard work and we have a lot of people out there who are too lazy to get up and get out there and get the ID they need .
I mean if individuals are too lazy , the state ca n't fix that '' .
Playing before a packed crowd , the game started with both teams ' national anthems played , followed by the Capitals giving their guests mini-basketballs .
Canberra started with Nicole Hunt , Jessica Bibby , Samantha Norwood , Ogoke , and Michelle Cosier on the floor .
China 's starting lineup included Liang Jiamei , Ma Xueya , Cui Xiaoxue , Huang Hongpin , and Shen Yi .
The Capitals led early in the first with a score of 6 -- 2 and then 6 -- 4 , before Jiamei made a three pointer to put China ahead 6 -- 7 by the time there was 6:33 left in the first .
Both teams made a number of substitutions in the first quarter and tried to shoot 3-point shots that they did not land .
The Capitals could not keep their hands on the ball , turning it over several times in the first .
Playing a zone defense , the Chinese team appeared to have better control on their side of the court when playing zone defense on that side of the court , while the Chinese offense frustrated the Capitals who were playing man-to-man and appeared to lose the woman they were marking .
The Chinese were also quick to foul , allowing Canberra to go into bonus .
The quarter ended 13 -- 19 thanks to a last minute shot by Hunt .
The second quarter started with a Canberra possession , where they turned over the ball to China before they were able to get a shot up .
Ogoke managed to steal the ball back before China could capitalize on the turnover .
The Chinese bench started making noise on the bench , cheering and chanting to support their teammates on the court .
Chinese fouls sent Canberra to the line several times , with Norwood scoring a pair with 1:41 left in the half .
Dombkins made a pair of baskets in the remaining time to bring the score to within two by end of the quarter .
At the end of the first half , with the score 31 -- 33 in favour of China , Norwood led the Capitals in scoring with 11 points and was the only team member in double digits .
Mikaela Dombkins and Hunt both had 6 points , with six total Capitals players having gotten points on the board .
On the Chinese side , Sun Mengran led her team in scoring with 12 points .
Contrasting half time styles saw the Capitals go into the locker room , while China stayed on the court and practice shooting baskets .
When the second half got under way , Ogoke scored for Canberra to tie up the game .
By the time there was 1:18 left , Canberra led by 53 -- 46 with China in foul trouble and the Capitals sitting there with four .
Four seconds later , Bibby drew a foul and was all smiles before going to the line .
With 50.6 seconds left in the third , Cheng Feng fouled out and sent Bibby to the line again , where Bibby scored another pair of three throws .
Graf was yelling at her team to push down the court , and Hunt did , scoring 2 points to put her team ahead by 13 .
With 5 seconds left in the quarter , the Capitals turn the ball over and the quarter ends 59 -- 46 .
China scored to go up again , but Cosier then drew a foul , went to the line and made a pair of baskets to tie the game again .
Ogoke scored again and the Capitals went ahead by two .
Bibby quickly added to the lead with another 2 points .
Following a Chinese time out , China took advantage of a free throw opportunity to narrow the score to 39 -- 37 .
Canberra fell apart a bit , with Cosier turning over the ball and Bibby missing a pass because she was out of position .
Thee Capitals were not marking players , leaving the Chinese shooters open , but they could not get the ball in the net .
With 5:27 left in the third , Canberra was leading by three .
Hunt , Bibby , Norwood , Ogoke and Cosier started the fourth for Canberra , while Ma Xueya , Sun Mengran , Jiamei , Shen Yi and Huang Hongpin started for China .
China continued to play zone defense in this quarter and their bench continued to support their on court players .
By the time there was 2:09 left in the game , Hunt was trying to slow play down .
When Hunt was subbed out , the game sped up again .
With 24 seconds left , China scored a 3 pointer to bring the score to 75 -- 64 where the score remained unchanged in the remaining time .
With the Caps ahead 61 -- 50 , Graf yelled at Hunt to shoot , and Hunt did , making a 3-point shot .
Later in the quarter , Hunt shot an airball and Brigitte Ardossi did a good job keeping in play , getting the ball back to Hunt who failed to score on the next shot .
Hunt would finish the half 2 of 4 from 2 point range .
With 4:52 left in the game , China took a time out .
On the bench , Xueya had her fingers buddy taped , despite not starting the game with her fingers that way .
Following the time out , Graf had to yell at Bibby several times .
On the next opportunity to bring subs in , Bibby was subbed out of the game .
China kept trying to score 3 points but was unable to capitalise .
The game ended with Jessica Bibby leading in scoring for her team with 16 total points , 1 point ahead of Norwood who had 15 and 2 points ahead of Hunt who had 14 .
6 of Bibby 's points came from a pair of 3-point shots in the second half .
The only other player for her team to score a 3 pointer was Hunt .
Only Tessa Lavey , who played only 2 minutes and 12 seconds and the returning Alice Coddington who played 13 minutes and 56 seconds failed to score for the Capitals .
Dombkins led her team in rebounding with 8 , while newcomer Ogoke had 7 .
A state transport bus fell off a bridge on the river Purna killing at least seventeen people in Buldhana district of Maharashtra in central India .
The Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation -LRB- MSRTC -RRB- bus between Paturda and Shegaon fell after a burst tire caused the driver to lose control of the vehicle .
The bus tumbled twice , falling 45 feet .
The bus contained about 50 -- 70 passengers including school children in the morning bus .
About twenty other passengers were rescued by the villagers from being drowned .
The injured were transported to General Hospital , Akola .
Two more are reported dead at the hospital , increasing the death toll to nineteen .
In the past two days , at least two rockets fired from Syria have landed in northern Israel , according to the Israeli military .
Both rockets landed in the Golan Heights neighborhood of Israel , which shares its border with Syria .
At least two mortar shells also hit the same area yesterday .
No damage to buildings was reported and no one was injured in any of the incidents .
Israeli Defense Forces -LRB- IDF -RRB- believe that the rockets and mortars were strays intended for `` villages inside Syria and are part of the ongoing internal conflict . ''
Earlier this year , Wikinews reported the Syrian army fired several rockets or mortar shells at residences , near the position of a citizen journalist in Homs , Syria .
The attack injured or killed an unknown number of civilians and badly damaged several homes .
The Fars News Agency -LRB- FNA -RRB- , an Iranian news agency , yesterday reported an article from US satirical news website The Onion as fact .
The article reports `` a Gallup poll '' suggesting `` the overwhelming majority of rural white Americans '' would prefer to vote for Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , the President of Iran , as opposed to US President Barack Obama .
The Onion article reports `` 77 percent of rural Caucasian voters '' saying they would prefer to drink beer with Ahmadinejad or attend a baseball game with him .
Fictional West Virginia resident Dale Swiderski is reported by the Chicago , Illinois based website saying about Ahmadinejad : `` I like him better '' .
` Swiderski ' is also quoted as saying the Iranian President `` takes national defense seriously , and he 'd never let some gay protesters tell him how to run his country like Obama does . ''
In Iran , homosexuality is a criminal offence which can carry a penalty of incarceration or capital punishment .
The FNA copied The Onion 's article verbatim and in its entirety , excluding part of a sentence saying Ahmadinejad was `` a man who has repeatedly denied the Holocaust and has had numerous political prisoners executed '' .
However , the Iranian news service did not attribute The Onion as its source .
A link to the FNA article page redirects to an error message which reads : `` Error For Your Request .
However , The Onion included a link to a screenshot of the FNA 's page on their original article , accompanied by a message telling readers to `` visit our Iranian subsidiary organization '' for more information on the story .
There are no reports of the article being republished in Persian .
The FNA has yet to comment on the incident .
However , The Onion 's editor Will Tracy humourously remarked their website `` freely shares content with Fars and commends the journalists at Iran 's Finest News Source on their superb reportage '' .
This is not the first time The Onion has caused the mistaken belief of their material being accurate .
In a November 2007 interview with Wikinews , The Onion 's Editorial Manager Chet Clem recounted an incident in which the Beijing Evening News reproduced a story from The Onion created in 2002 , copied entirely verbatim , headlined `` Congress threatens to leave DC unless new capitol is built '' .
When the error was highlighted to the Chinese newspaper , Clem said `` their response was not to print a correction , but just to say that some newspapers in America make money by printing lies . ''
In a separate incident , Christians forwarded a story on the Internet from The Onion saying children were converting to Satanism as a result of reading the Harry Potter book series .
The Iranian Fars News Agency -LRB- FNA -RRB- yesterday apologised over an article it reproduced Friday , originally written by US satirical news website The Onion on Monday September 24 .
The parodic article reported `` a Gallup poll '' suggesting `` the overwhelming majority of rural white Americans '' would vote for Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , the President of Iran , instead of US President Barack Obama .
The Onion article also said `` 77 percent of rural Caucasian voters '' would prefer to drink beer with Ahmadinejad or attend a baseball game with him as opposed to Obama .
However , the editor-in-chief also said `` we do believe that if a free opinion poll is conducted in the US , a majority of Americans would prefer anyone outside the US political system to President Barack Obama and American statesmen '' .
He stressed that this belief does not constitute justification for the error .
` Swiderski ' is also quoted by the Chicago , Illinois website as saying the Iranian President `` takes national defense seriously , and he 'd never let some gay protesters tell him how to run his country like Obama does . ''
The FNA 's error made international headlines , including in the United States , Canada , the United Kingdom , India , and Australia .
This is not the first time The Onion has caused the mistaken belief of their material being factual .
The bottom of the FNA 's statement introduces a list of notable BBC errors reported by The Daily Telegraph on December 6 , 2010 .
While the FNA referenced The Daily Telegraph and the order of the mistakes was changed from the original article , the wording was reproduced verbatim , excluding one omitted sentence under the subheading ` Nicky Campbell and hunting mark II ' which reads : `` Campbell , who is also the presenter of the BBC 's flagship programme for Holy Week , apologised profusely for the mistake . ''
Former New York Times publisher Arthur Ochs Sulzberger died at 86 years old on Saturday .
According to his family Sulzberger had had a long illness .
In 1963 , Sulzberger became publisher of The New York Times and chairman and chief executive of The New York Times Company .
In 1997 , Sulzberger left the chief executive position and was succeeded by his son , Arthur Ochs Sulzberger , Jr. .
While Sulzberger was the paper 's publisher it won 31 Pulitzer Prizes .
In a statement to the San Francisco Chronicle , Governor Brown described the bill : `` This bill bans non-scientific ` therapies ' that have driven young people to depression and suicide .
These practices have no basis in science or medicine and they will now be relegated to the dustbin of quackery '' .
LGBT rights campaigners have welcomed the announcement .
Chad Griffin , the president of the Human Rights Campaign , which petitioned Brown to pass the law , stated `` LGBT youth will now be protected from a practice that has not only been debunked as junk science , but has been proven to have drastically negative effects on their well-being '' .
Griffin also called for other states to implement similar laws .
Kay Kendell from the National Center for Lesbian Rights stated : `` Governor Brown has sent a powerful message of affirmation and support to LGBT youth and their families .
This law will ensure that state-licensed therapists can no longer abuse their power to harm LGBT youth and propagate the dangerous and deadly lie that sexual orientation is an illness or disorder that can be ` cured . ' ''
In a # 24m deal , Sports Direct have agreed to purchase and rebrand 20 stores as well as purchasing the brand , stock , website , the license to the Slazenger Golf brand and JJB 's Wigan headquarters .
The deal with Sports Direct will keep 500 employees in work .
In addition , 167 employees will continue working for JJB while KPMG , the appointed administrators , wind the company down .
The bulk of the money from the Sports Direct deal will go to pay back loans made by Lloyds Banking Group as well as money owned to the sports clothing brand Adidas and the American sports retailer Dick 's Sporting Goods , who had previously invested # 20m in JJB .
Shareholders are not expected to get any payout .
Former professional footballer and Wigan FC owner Dave Whelan , who founded the company in 1971 and sold his share in 2007 , decided not to invest to save the business .
According to Nielson , approximately 67.2 million people tuned in to the 90-minute debate moderated by Jim Lehrer of PBS as President Obama , the Democratic nominee , and Romney , the Republican nominee , exchanged jabs on domestic policy and the U.S. economy .
Viewership increased 28 % from the first 2008 presidential debate , which had an audience of about 52.4 million people .
According to a poll conducted by CBS News , 46 % of the 500 uncommitted respondents believed Romney won the debate ; 22 % of respondents believed President Obama won the debate and 32 % believed it was a tie .
In the same poll , 56 % of respondents held a more favorable opinion of Romney following the debate , while 11 % expressed a poorer opinion and 32 % did not change their opinion of the Republican .
Of the respondents , 13 % viewed President Obama more favorably , while 17 % viewed him less favorably and 69 % indicated they did not change their opinion .
President Obama and Romney are to spar again in New York on October 16 and in Florida on October 22 .
A Norwegian University of Science and Technology study released Thursday found electric vehicles have a potential for higher eco-toxicity and greenhouse impact than conventional cars .
The study includes an examination of the electric car 's life cycle as a whole rather than a study of the electric car 's environmental impact during the use phase .
The researchers conducted a comparison of the environmental impact of electric cars in view of different ratios of green-to-fuel electricity energy sources .
In the case of mostly coal - or oil-based electricity supply , electric cars are disadvantageous compared to classic diesel cars with the greenhouse effect impact being up to two times larger .
Chávez gave these remarks from the presidential palace : `` Truthfully , this has been the perfect battle , a democratic battle .
Venezuela will continue its march toward the democratic socialism of the 21st century . ''
Radonski promised a shift towards more of a business-friendly stance : `` Those who want progress , jobs , well-managed companies , somewhere we can develop small and medium businesses ... everyone who wants that kind of country , come and join my bus for progress '' .
Following a study linking poisonous crown-of-thorns starfish to 42 percent of Australia 's Great Barrier Reef destruction in recent decades , James Cook University Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies in Queensland has developed a culture to destroy the reef-killing starfish , announced yesterday .
The researchers have carried out successful trials of the culture against the starfish .
The culture is expected to replace a manual treatment of the problem , involving a poison injection delivered by a diver to each starfish .
One of the researchers , Jairo Rivera Posada , stressed urgency and scale of the threat : `` In the current outbreak in the Philippines they removed as many as 87,000 starfish from a single beach '' .
The researchers said the culture infects a starfish with bacteria that kill it within just 24 hours and spread by contact with other individuals of the species .
This means divers would need to inject just one starfish to infect and destroy many individuals living close to each other .
A Finnish study has indicated that having higher body levels of lycopene -- a red chemical occurring in tomatoes , watermelons , grapefruit , peppers , and papaya -- may reduce the risk of stroke .
The research for the study , which is in the issue of medical journal Neurology released today , examined 1,031 men aged between 42 and 61 over a period of twelve years on average .
The study , which was financed by the Lapland Central Hospital , found that the men with higher amounts of lycopene in their blood system experienced fewer strokes than men with lower levels .
This suggests a stroke was 55 % less likely if one had a high amount of the chemical in one 's diet than if one had a low amount .
`` The results support the recommendation that people get more than five servings of fruits and vegetables a day , '' said Dr Jouni Karppi of the Department of Medicine at the University of Eastern Finland .
Eating these types of foods in such quantities `` would likely lead to a major reduction in the number of strokes worldwide , according to previous research '' , the primary author of the study continued .
In the US state of New York , Lenox Hill Hospital Center for Stroke and Neuro-Endovascular Surgery director Dr. Rafael Ortiz said that , alongside exercise and non-smoking , `` diet is very important '' for reducing the likelihood of stroke .
However , these results `` should not deter people from eating other types of fruit and vegetables as they all have health benefits and remain an important part of a staple diet '' , according to Dr Clare Walton of The Stroke Association in the UK .
The results came as part of a wider study on cardiovascular disease development risks .
The United States Department of Agriculture also registers high concentrations of lycopene in tomato purées , pastes and sauces .
All those surveyed lived in , or in close proximity to , the Finnish town of Kuopio , where the University of Eastern Finland is located .
This Wednesday , the United States Department of Commerce issued a ruling to set tariffs on Chinese-made solar panels ranging from 18 % to 250 % for different solar panels manufacturers .
China protested against the new tariffs on Thursday claiming that they make export of solar panels to the USA unprofitable .
Wang Shuai , a spokesman for the Yingli solar energy company , commented that 30 % tariffs are unprofitable .
Both of them mean the door is closed for exporting to the United States .
Actor and television host Gary Collins died yesterday at age 74 .
He appeared on television shows such as Charlie 's Angels , Fantasy Island , and The Love Boat .
In 2011 , Collins separated from his wife Miss America 1959 winner Mary Ann Mobley after 44 years .
Gary Collins was born on April 30 , 1938 in Venice , California .
Collins attended Santa Monica City College prior to enlisting in the US Army .
After he left the army his civilian television career got underway with the television series The Wackiest Ship in the Army .
United Kingdom Prime Minister David Cameron and Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond have signed a deal for a referendum on Scottish independence to be held in the autumn of 2014 .
The deal , signed in the Scottish capital , Edinburgh , gives the Scottish Government clear legal power to hold a referendum .
The deal lapses if a referendum is not held before the end of 2014 .
The deal , signed on Monday , achieves a compromise between the proposals of Mr Cameron and Mr Salmond .
Sixteen - and seventeen-year-olds are to be allowed to vote in the referendum .
Mr Salmond favoured this .
Mr Salmond had proposed a second question on the ballot paper , on so-called ` devo-max ' .
This would have given Scotland full tax-raising powers while still remaining inside the United Kingdom if voters rejected independence .
The pro- and anti-independence campaigns have been setting out their positions .
The pro-independence campaign , which is led by former BBC Scotland news chief Blair Jenkins and supported by Mr Salmond 's Scottish National Party and the Scottish Green Party , seeks to convince voters of the benefits of independence .
Mr Salmond said : `` The agreement will see Scotland take an important step toward independence , and the means to create a fairer and more prosperous Scotland .
The anti-independence campaign Better Together is headed up by former U.K. chancellor Alistair Darling and is supported by the Scottish Labour Party , the Scottish Conservatives , and the Scottish Liberal Democrats .
Mr Darling suggested Scotland leaving the union would mean a pointlessly `` uncertain future '' .
Currently , Scotland is run through devolution .
The Scottish Parliament can make laws on ` devolved ' issues , which include health , education , and policing .
United States president Barack Obama criticized his presidential challenger Mitt Romney over his response to the killing of the U.S ambassador to Libya on Tuesday in the second of three presidential debates .
At the debate in Hempstead , New York , President Obama was critical of Mr Romney for trying to score `` political points '' from the incident .
Mr Obama faced criticism for the apparent lack of security at the U.S Consulate in Benghazi .
Tuesday , U.S Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she took responsibility for the failure in security at the counsulate , which led to the ambassador 's death .
Elsewhere in the debate , there was controversy as moderator Candy Crowley appeared to side with President Obama when Mr Romney said that President Obama was not quick enough to call the killing of the ambassador `` terrorism '' .
On the day of the attack , President Obama actually said '' ... no acts of terror will ever shake the resolve of this great nation '' .
Despite that comment , some of President Obama 's top aides had initially attributed the killing to the film Innocence of Muslims which led to protests elsewhere in the Middle East .
The rest of the debate was mostly dominated by the economy , jobs and taxes .
The next debate is scheduled to take place on October 22 at Lynn University in Florida .
The candidates will be seeking to clinch the votes of the millions of undecided voters .
In a statement , Grieve made a case for it being in the public interest to not release the documents .
He noted that the publication of the Prince 's correspondence would damage his preparation for kingship by damaging the public perception that he is `` party-political neutral '' by showing the Prince disagreeing with the policies of the government .
Grieve then stated '' -LSB- a -RSB- ny such perception would be seriously damaging to his role as future Monarch , because if he forfeits his position of political neutrality as heir to the Throne , he can not easily recover it when he is King '' .
The Freedom of Information Act request was made by Rob Evans , a journalist writing for The Guardian .
The Guardian stated they intend to take the government to court to challenge Grieve 's decision .
Smith argued : `` Grieve has said this is about protecting prince Charles 's impartiality , but that impartiality does n't exist .
Charles has made that clear .
This decision is about pretending Charles is impartial while he continues to lobby in favour of his own political agenda .
If Grieve believes Charles to be impartial then let him prove it by allowing the release of these documents . ''
Prince Charles has been criticised in the past for repeated use of his power and influence .
The architect Richard Rogers claimed that the Prince , who has strongly traditionalist views on architecture , repeatedly intervened to have projects cancelled which he was working on .
Rogers criticised the decision not to release Charles ' correspondence : `` It is not democratic to cover up his interventions . ''
The procession started Saturday morning on the opposite side of the river Weser in the `` Neustadt '' and passed the city hall about one hour later .
146 colorfully decorated groups were taking part , some of them dancing to their own music , and were watched by about 200.000 people in the streets during more than four hours of the whole performance .
The event could also be viewed on television and on livestream on the web .
The Free Fair opened on the place behind the main station of the city of Bremen a week ago .
For a few years , an historical spectacle involving actors of the theatre group Shakespeare Company has been part of the opening performance of the fair .
With a replica of an old cog an ambassador enters the banks of the river Weser close to the city and walks with his companions to the market place in front of the city hall of Bremen where the Kleiner Freimarkt -LRB- Small Free Fair -RRB- is opened .
Members of the Chimney Sweep Guild hang up a big heart at the statue of Roland as a sign of the opened market .
The traditional opening takes place in the Bavarian tent on the Bürgerweide behind the main station of Bremen with the tapping of the first keg by the incumbent Senator of the Interior of the Free Hansetown of Bremen .
This is followed by the dance with Miss Free Market on the stage .
Late at night , also fireworks are lighted over the place Bürgerweide and can be admired by people .
The exclamation Ischa Freimaak -LRB- It 's Free Fair -RRB- is meant to spread a relaxed and unreserved atmosphere among the guests .
The fair is a major source of revenue for showmen , carousels and food stalls , some of which arrived nearly two weeks before the opening from all over Germany .
This year the Freimarkt is to last until Sunday November 4 .
The subsequent disassembly , especially the technically complex rides , should then take about ten days .
The bomb also destroyed several cars and badly damaged a multistory building .
Witnesses said it could be heard several kilometers away .
Although the target of the attack is unclear , it comes at a time of heightened tensions in Lebanon because of the Syrian civil war .
The leader of Kataeb , which is also known as the Phalange , Sami al-Gemayel is a strong opponent of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad .
He said : `` Let the state protect the citizens .
Former 1972 U.S. election Democratic Presidential candidate and United States Senator from South Dakota George McGovern died Sunday at the age of 90 in Sioux Falls , South Dakota .
McGovern 's 1972 running mate was originally Thomas Eagleton , however , due to revelations about Eagleton 's psychiatric past , he was replaced by Sargent Shriver .
McGovern and his running mate Shriver lost to U.S. President Richard Nixon and Vice President Spiro Agnew .
McGovern got only 17 electoral votes .
He was the first Democrat elected in South Dakota to that position since 1930 .
McGovern and Bob Dole received the 2008 World Food Prize for creating a program for international child nutrition and education .
U.S. President Barack Obama said , `` George McGovern dedicated his life to serving the country he loved .
... Michelle and I share our thoughts and prayers with his family . ''
U.S. Vice President Joe Biden said , on behalf of himself and Second Lady Jill Biden , `` Jill and I are profoundly saddened to hear about George McGovern 's passing .
Former U.S. President Bill Clinton said , `` We were deeply saddened to learn of the passing of our friend George McGovern .
The world has lost a tireless advocate for human rights and dignity .
... Our thoughts and prayers go out to his family and friends . ''
Former Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives Newt Gingrich said , on CNN , `` George actually was a very complicated person .
He married Eleanor McGovern , and their marriage lasted 64 years until her death at the age of 85 in 2007 .
Roush Fenway Racing driver Matt Kenseth won his third race of the 2012 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series season and the second of the 2012 Chase for the Sprint Cup following the Hollywood Casino 400 in Kansas City , Kansas yesterday .
Kenseth , who started in the twelfth position , led 78 laps of the 267-lap race .
Michael Waltrip Racing driver Martin Truex , Jr. finished second , while Paul Menard finished third , ahead of Kasey Kahne and Tony Stewart .
Clint Bowyer , Regan Smith , Brad Keselowski , and Jimmie Johnson followed in the next four positions .
Jeff Gordon managed a tenth place finish .
Other drivers participating in the Chase for the Sprint Cup finished farther back , such as Denny Hamlin who finished thirteenth .
Johnson , who was second behind Keselowski in the Drivers ' Championship before the event , collided into the wall halfway through the race after leading 44 laps before the caution was given for Aric Almirola 's crash on lap 123 .
Johnson 's crew managed to keep Johnson on the same lap as the leaders , allowing him to gain positions .
After the race , Johnson stated , `` I 'm definitely proud of this team and the fact that we never give up , we continue to fight and we try to get every point that we can .
He bobbled a little in front of me , and I thought that was an opportunity to jump on the gas real hard .
When I did that , my car took off and I could n't catch it . ''
The topic of the debate was foreign policy and the candidates discussed the Arab Spring , Iran , and Mali , among other issues .
Mr. Obama criticised Mr. Romney 's foreign policy positions as `` all over the map '' .
Mr. Romney countered saying Mr. Obama had failed to take proper advantage of the Arab Spring : `` I congratulate him on taking out Osama bin Laden and going after the leadership of al-Qaeda , but we ca n't kill our way out of this mess '' .
Mr. Romney said Mr. Obama was proposing military budget cuts .
He said `` the highest responsibility of the President of the United states ... is to maintain the safety of the American people , and I will not cut our military budget by a trillion dollars ... That in my view is making our future less certain and less secure '' .
Mr. Obama accused Mr. Romney of not properly understanding modern defense priorities .
We have these things called aircraft carriers , where planes land on them .
We have these ships that go underwater , nuclear submarines '' .
Mr. Romney criticized his opponent for visiting the Middle East on an `` apology tour '' , and said he would be tougher with Iran .
`` I think from the very beginning , one of the challenges we 've had with Iran is that they have looked at this administration and felt that the administration was not as strong as it needed to be .
Mr. Obama said he would stand with Israel against Iranian threats but added that the main national security concern was terrorist networks .
Mr. Romney said northern Mali had been taken over by `` al-Qaeda-type individuals '' .
Mr. Romney criticized China for `` holding down artificially the value of their currency '' .
He added `` on day one , I will label them a currency manipulator , which allows us to apply tariffs where they 're taking jobs . ''
Mr. Obama countered saying under Mr. Romney 's policy America would be `` buying cars from China instead of selling cars to China '' .
Mr. Obama is to travel through Ohio , Florida , Virginia , Iowa , Colorado , and Nevada as well as appearing on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in a two-day `` America Forward Tour '' .
Mr. Romney is to hold two joint rallies with his vice-presidential candidate Paul Ryan in Nevada and Colorado before going on to campaign in Iowa and Ohio .
Mr. Romney 's advisers said he would also consider making a speech on government spending and debt in the next few days .
The Qatari leader pledged $ 400 million for construction projects .
Much of the strip 's infrastructure was destroyed by Israeli bombing in 2008 .
The Emir of Qatar called for unity of the various Palestinian groups .
Why should n't brothers sit together and reconcile ? ''
Hamas Prime Minister Ismail Haniya said the visit demonstrated Gaza is `` not alone '' and broke Israel 's blockade of Gaza .
Israel regards Hamas as a terrorist group .
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas contacted the emir directly to point out the international community recognizes Mr Abbas as the Palestinian leader .
Spokesman Yigal Palmor for Israel 's Foreign Ministry said , `` This is more than strange , especially since Hamas is internationally recognized as a terror group .
By hugging Hamas publicly , the emir of Qatar has thrown peace under the bus . ''
Qatar has negotiated in Lebanon and with the Taliban .
The country also maintains contacts in Islamic politics and scholarship .
The fraud relates to the purchase of television film rights by a company owned by Mr Berlusconi , Mediaset , which the company then re-sold at exaggerated prices .
Although sentenced to one year in prison , Mr Berlusconi , 76 , might not serve the one-year sentence because there will be two opportunities to appeal the verdict , which may take many years and no prison time is served until after the verdict is confirmed .
Mr Berlusconi is also banned for three years from any political office .
Mr Berlusconi resigned in November from his position as Prime Minister .
He has in the past faced several allegations against him , including embezzlement , fraud , and bribery .
The United States is preparing for the arrival of Hurricane Sandy .
The hurricane , which is expected to hit late Sunday into Monday , could affect up to sixty million people .
The Governor of New York , Andrew Cuomo , announced that all subway , bus and train services in New York City would be suspended from 19:00 EST on Sunday evening .
The hurricane has already caused damage and fatalities in several Caribbean countries this week .
Meteorologists are concerned that it will turn into a `` Frankenstorm '' as it amalgamates with a winter storm in the run up to Halloween .
Authorities warned that a full moon could trigger high tides with storm surges of up to 3 metres which would cause sea water to surge through Lower Manhattan .
New York mayor Michael Bloomberg urged people to take action now to keep themselves safe .
`` I do n't want anybody to go to bed tonight thinking that they can spend the day worrying about the night after , '' Mr Bloomberg said .
`` If you do n't evacuate , you are not only endangering your life , you are also endangering the lives of the first responders who are going in to rescue you , '' he said .
The Governor of New York , Andrew Cuomo , has announced that several bridges are to close from 19:00 EDT -- George Washington , Verrazano-Narrows , Throgs Neck , Whitestone , Henry Hudson , Cross Bay Veterans , and from 16:00 EDT the Tappan Zee .
The New York Stock Exchange trading floor is closed today and is to remain closed tomorrow but electronic transactions are still able to take place .
Public schools are to remain closed tomorrow in New York , Washington and Philadelphia .
The Washington metro is also to be closed tomorrow because of the hurricane .
The state of Delaware has announced a mandatory evacuation order for 50,000 people from coastal areas and New Jersey Governor Chris Christie urged people not to take risks .
I can be as cynical as any of you but when the storm comes , if it 's as bad as they 're predicting it will be , you 're gon na wish you were n't as cynical as you might otherwise have been . ''
The hurricane has also affected the election campaigning plans of the two main presidential candidates Mitt Romney and Barack Obama .
Romney announced that he had cancelled a planned campaign rally yesterday evening in Virginia Beach and Vice-President Joe Biden cancelled a visit there on Saturday .
Along with many allegations from many other women in the wider investigation , Karin Ward claims she was groped by Starr in the 1970s when she , then aged 14 , attended a recording of Savile 's television show ` Clunk Click ' .
Starr 's is the second arrest following investigations into the claims made about Savile .
The glam rock musician Gary Glitter , real name Paul Gadd , was arrested for questioning on Sunday .
Glitter has gone to prison in the United Kingdom for downloading child pornography and in Vietnam for child sex offences .
Oral evidence will be presented next week to an independent inquiry at the BBC into the decision to cancel a planned Newsnight story regarding Jimmy Savile allegations .
The former head of Sky News , Nick Pollard , has been asked to see if the BBC handled the Newsnight investigation properly .
Pollard 's inquiry will also look into claims made in a blog post made in October by the editor of Newsnight , Peter Rippon .
The post has attracted criticism from BBC journalists and has been edited with corrections a number of times since .
On Wednesday , Obama visited New Jersey , meeting with Governor Chris Christie in Atlantic City , and spoke to victims of the storm at a community center in Brigantine .
Obama earned the praise of the Republican governor who said '' -LSB- Obama had -RSB- sprung into action immediately '' .
The President 's reaction to the storm also earned him positive polling , with a Washington Post/ABC survey saying 8 out of 10 respondents thought Obama had responded in a `` good '' or `` excellent '' manner to the storm .
After restarting the campaign , Obama has campaigned in Wisconsin where he has attacked Romney 's proposed policies as being the same as those of George W. Bush .
`` Governor Romney has been using all his talents as a salesman to dress up these very same policies that failed our country so badly - the very same policies we 've been cleaning up after for the past four years - and he is offering them up as change . ''
Yesterday , the independent mayor of New York Michael Bloomberg gave his endorsement to Obama .
With several areas of New York affected by flooding from Hurricane Sandy , the former Republican mayor said Obama 's stance on climate change factored in his decision .
Writing an editorial for Bloomberg View , the mayor asserted : `` Our climate is changing .
And while the increase in extreme weather we have experienced in New York City and around the world may or may not be the result of it , the risk that it may be -- given the devastation it is wreaking -- should be enough to compel all elected leaders to take immediate action . ''
Bloomberg said Obama had taken action to deal with climate change ; has proposed measures to reduce emissions from cars and power plants .
Bloomberg explained he could not support Romney as the Republican challenger had changed his position on several issues .
`` In the past he has taken sensible positions on immigration , illegal guns , abortion rights and health care -- but he has reversed course on all of them , and is even running against the very health care model he signed into law in Massachusetts , '' said Bloomberg .
Bloomberg did however have some criticism of Obama .
He said that Obama had `` engaged in partisan attacks and has embraced a divisive populist agenda focused more on redistributing income than creating it . ''
Responding in a statement , Obama said he was `` honored to have Mayor Bloomberg 's endorsement '' .
Romney spoke at an event in the city of Roanoke , Virginia , criticising Obama 's proposal to create a cabinet-level position for business development .
In his speech in Virginia , Romney stated : `` I do n't think adding a new chair in his cabinet will help add millions of jobs on Main Street .
Romney also launched a TV advert which stated that the idea represents a broader failing of the Obama presidency by suggesting that Obama 's `` solution to everything is to add another bureaucrat . ''
After speaking in Roanoke , Romney spoke in Doswell , Virginia .
His speech was interrupted by a protester who shouted `` Climate change caused Sandy !
Let 's get real ! ''
Jill Stein , the presidential candidate for the Green Party of the United States , was arrested on Wednesday in Winnsboro in east Texas for misdemeanor criminal trespassing while trying to bring food and confectionery to environmental protesters who have been camping in trees for over a month to protest the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline .
23-year-old Donald Junior Green , who lives on Mendip Close , was charged with possession of class A drugs and is due to appear before Oldham Magistrates ' Court today .
A 21-year-old woman arrested on suspicion of the same type of offence has been released without charge .
`` The parents and police acted quickly when this report was made , in the interests of public safety , '' said Superintendent Catherine Hankinson .
Pupils sit GCSEs aged between 14 -- 16 .
Chief Regulator Glenys Stacey said schools were under too much pressure to achieve certain grades , which contributed to the over-marking .
She also said exams place too much emphasis on teachers ' marks .
It 's clear that children are increasingly spending too much time jumping through hoops rather than learning the real skills they need in life .
She said English teachers had been put under particular pressure .
`` Teachers feel under enormous pressure in English , more than in any other subject , and we have seen that too often , this is pushing them to the limit .
The leaders of several teaching unions objected to the report .
`` For Ofqual to suggest that teachers and schools are to blame is outrageous , and flies in the face of the evidence .
Ofqual is responsible for ensuring fairness and accuracy in the system '' , said Deputy General Sectretary of the of the ASCL union Malcolm Trobe .
`` The fact remains that different standards were applied to the exams in June and January and this is blatantly wrong .
The accountability measures do place tremendous pressure on teachers and schools , especially at GCSE grade C , but to say that teachers would compromise their integrity to the detriment of students is an insult . ''
There was controversy concerning GCSE English exams in the UK earlier this year .
In June 's GCSE English exam , the grade boundaries were different from the exam in January , which meant thousands of pupils received lower June grades than they would have in January .
The Welsh Education Minister Leighton Andrews ordered a re-grading of Welsh pupils ' exam papers ; pupils who sat exams in England were left with their original grades .
Pupils in England , Wales , and Northern Ireland currently sit GCSEs .
This year , the UK government announced plans to replace GCSEs with a new examination , similar to the old O-levels .
In Scotland pupils currently sit Standard Grade examinations , which will shortly be replaced by National 4 and 5 exams .
With the U.S. presidential election looming , former New Mexico governor and current Libertarian Party presidential nominee Gary Johnson spoke with Wikinews reporter William S. Saturn on an assortment of economic , foreign , and social issues .
In the interview , Johnson makes his final plea to voters before they cast their ballots on Election Day , November 6 .
So you 're talking about a thirty-year-old who does n't have health insurance ; there conceivably could be government step in and it would be state government , not federal government .
I really believe that we have to slash Medicare and Medicaid spending ; that Medicare is a program that you and I put $ 30,000 into in our lifetimes and we receive $ 100,000 plus benefits and by that whatever we contribute in we get back three times , more than three times what we contribute in .
Federally funded healthcare is not sustainable .
So with that said , I would leave it to the states to draw new lines of eligibility and when it comes to this hypothetical kid that you 're talking about that falls into a coma , I 'm believing that state governments will come up with a program to address that kind of individual .
On your website , you say `` America simply can not afford to be engaged in foreign policy programs that are not clearly protecting U.S. interests . ''
In the case of a humanitarian crisis as in Syria right now , does the U.S. ever have a moral obligation to intervene militarily even if it is not clearly in the U.S. interest ?
The notion of ... Well first of all , let me borrow from a Supreme Court Justice that was asked his definition of pornography .
Our men and service women come back with their limbs blown off .
And so when you talk about humanitarian , when you talk about atrocities , when you talk about genocide , when you talk about the Holocaust , I do n't think any of us want to stand by and watch something like that happen .
Well as the commander-in-chief , I 'd like to think I 'd be the first one that would recognize it if it actually was occurring .
If we were to intervene , first and foremost would be Congress vetting that and actually approving that , but look , I just think that we militarily intervene as a result of our military intervention , but I think we have hundreds of millions of enemies to this country that look for our military intervention that otherwise would not exist .
Our men and service women end up dying .
If you legalize marijuana , arguably 75 percent of that border violence with Mexico goes away .
These are disputes that are being played out with guns rather than the courts .
I think there would be less of a need for border security if we had a moving line for immigrants that would want to come into this country and work to get a work visa .
So my pledge is I 'm going to create a moving line for immigrants that want to come into this country and work to get a work visa .
That would entail a background check and a Social Security card so that applicable taxes would get paid .
I am espousing eliminating income tax , corporate tax , abolishing the IRS and replacing it all with one federal consumption tax : the fair tax .
Whether you 're illegal , legal , a visitor to the U.S. , or a U.S. citizen , nobody is going to avoid paying one federal consumption tax .
-LRB- -LRB- William S. Saturn -RRB- -RRB- Let 's get into social issues now .
You criticized President Obama for his stance that same-sex marriage be left to the states .
With the Tenth Amendment in mind , why should same-sex marriage be a federal issue and why should the federal government mandate that states allow same sex marriage ?
Gary Johnson : Well I think that first and foremost that as president of the United States you take an oath to govern under strict adherence to the U.S. Constitution .
I would espouse ... I would suggest that marriage equality is a constitutionally guaranteed right of Equal Protection Clause that is on par with Civil Rights of the sixties .
Effectively what you 're saying is that ` I 'm not going to do anything when it comes to marriage equality ' , and I take the position that marriage equality is a constitutionally guaranteed right so goes the federal involvement .
The first nominee of the Party was John Hospers , who died last year , and he was a supporter of Republican President George W. Bush .
The next nominee Roger MacBride also left the party and went to the Republican Party .
The 1988 nominee Ron Paul , as we all know , serves in the House of Representatives as a member of the Republican Party , and his son -LSB- Rand Paul -RSB- serves in the Senate as a member of the Republican Party .
Both the 2008 presidential and vice-presidential nominees of the Libertarian Party : Bob Barr and Wayne Allyn Root have recently rejoined the Republican Party and have both endorsed Mitt Romney for president .
So why does it seem Libertarians flock to the Republican Party ?
Though a member of the Libertarian Party in the early 1990s , Johnson was elected and re-elected governor of New Mexico in 1994 and 1998 as a Republican .
During his governorship , he vetoed over 750 bills , more than all other then-governors combined , and left the state with a $ 1 billion budget surplus .
Gary Johnson : I 'm not so certain ... I think that the tie-in is -LSB- libertarian -RSB- Republicans are fiscally conservative and socially accepting .
I will just tell you that last night , although it did not happen , apparently the Democrats were going to come and protest my speaking at the University of Colorado at Boulder .
I guess it was all those anti-gay , anti-immigration , pro-Drug War , pro-military interventionists that were going to show up and protest me .
-LRB- -LRB- WSS -RRB- -RRB- But you admit that there are some Liberty Republicans and that Republicans make up a large portion of libertarians .
Johnson : Well , I think libertarians are libertarians .
Should such libertarian Republicans support you and guaranteeing their vote will go to you rather than voting Republican ... Let me rephrase this question ... Let 's say that a Rand Paul Republican was considering who to vote for and they could choose between guaranteeing their vote would not go to the Republican , which they see as the small-government alternative in the duopoly , rather than voting Republican and ensuring their vote will go to someone who they believe is the small government alternative , should they still support you ?
I mean , if you go back to the -LSB- Vice presidential -RSB- debate the other night between -LSB- Republican vice presidential nominee Paul -RSB- Ryan and -LSB- Vice president Joe -RSB- Biden , Ryan says toward the end of the debate , he goes , hey , look we 're going to increase spending by three percent , they 're going to increase spending by four and a half percent , what 's the big deal ?
There 's not a big deal between either one of them and if libertarian-leaning Republicans want to send a message to elected Republican leaders then vote for me that 's how you 're going to send a message .
You 're not going to send a message by voting in the status quo .
The OC Weekly website reported last week that your running mate , Judge Jim Gray remarked during an appearance at Tulane University that you two plan to run again in 2016 .
You know what , I do n't know what that 's going to equate to votes on Election Day , but I 'll just say from my standpoint , William , there 's just a whole lot of enthusiasm and I do think that this is the future of politics so I 'm staying around here , I think the last thing anyone wants to hear is that I 'm going to run again when , you know , this is an election that has n't even taken place , and I mean the one on Tuesday .
After winning the nomination this past May , Johnson has campaigned throughout the nation espousing the Fair Tax , spending cuts across the board , a repeal of Obamacare , an audit of the Federal Reserve , a non-interventionist foreign policy , an end to the Drug War , and legalization of same-sex marriage .
He and his running mate , Judge Jim Gray of California , have attained ballot access in all U.S. states except Michigan , where he is a write-in candidate , and Oklahoma .
Nationally , he has received four percent registered-voter support in the past two CNN/Opinion Research Polls that included him with President Barack Obama , Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and Green Party nominee Jill Stein .
It is the campaign 's goal to reach five percent on Election Day , which will enable the party to receive ballot access and federal funding on par with the two major parties .
-LRB- -LRB- WSS -RRB- -RRB- You also propose decreasing federal education spending including decreases in Pell Grants and loans for college students .
It 's not a market made up of supply and demand .
And it 's a market where kids are going to school because they 're guaranteed a government student loan and because of that , the vast institutions of higher learning , colleges and universities are immune from pricing much much dramatically lower than they would have to price themselves at if government student loans did not exist .
And that is n't to say that government student loans would go away .
So these loans are going to get paid back but the argument is is that student loans , government-guaranteed student loans are a direct cause of tuition being as high as it is .
`` A healthy thirty-year-old young man has a good job , makes a good living , but decides , you know what ?
I 'm not going to spend $ 200 or $ 300 a month for health insurance because I 'm healthy , I do n't need it .
According to officials in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh , almost 100,000 people have been forced to leave their homes due to severe weather , with 95,000 people in government-run relief camps .
So far , 25 people have died in the state as a result of the torrential rains and heavy flooding .
An additional 15 people were killed in the neighboring state of Tamil Nadu .
`` The unseasonal rainfall has destroyed our crops and our entire field is submerged in water , '' says Arku Rajaipa , a farmer in Gunthur district .
He also said that his family would be forced to rely on the government for food for the rest of the year .
Going into the elections , Obama was already forecast to win in California , with RealClearPolitics predicting he would win by 14 points .
ABC OTUS had also predicted Obama would win the state .
Incumbent U.S. President Barack Obama has been projected enough electoral votes to win re-election , defeating Republican challenger Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election .
Many of the major media outlets have called the election for Obama .
Obama 's campaign succeeded in gaining the vote in the battleground states of Ohio , Iowa , Colorado , and New Hampshire .
Romney won in Indiana and North Carolina , two states Obama won in 2008 .
Obama thanked voters via Twitter , posting : `` This happened because of you .
In the race for the U.S. Senate in Massachusetts , Elizabeth Warren , who helped set up the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau , defeated incumbent Republican Scott Brown .
In Wisconsin , Democrat Tammy Baldwin defeated Tommy Thompson for U.S. Senate and will be the first openly gay member of the Senate .
In Missouri , Senator Claire McCaskill defeated her Republican challenger Todd Akin .
In August , Akin suggested that women who are victims of `` legitimate '' rape are unable to get pregnant .
Israeli leader Benjamin Netanyahu stated that he `` will continue to work with President Obama to preserve the strategic interests of Israel 's citizens '' and described relations between the U.S. and Israel as `` rock solid '' .
Some others within the ruling Likud party were not so optimistic about the relationship , with Knesset member Danny Danon criticising Obama for `` ill-advised '' policies towards Israel and hoping Obama `` resets his course relating to Israel and our region for the next four years '' .
The British Prime Minister David Cameron took time from his tour of the Middle East to congratulate Obama and listed as shared priorities a trade deal between the U.S. and the United Kingdom as well as solving the crisis in Syria .
Ed Miliband , leader of the opposition Labour Party , stated on Twitter that Obama 's success in the election was `` based on building fairer economy and optimism about what politics can achieve . ''
French leader François Hollande said in choosing Obama over Mitt Romney , voters in the United States had voted for `` an America of openness and solidarity , fully engaged on the international scene and conscious of the challenges facing our planet : peace , economy and the environment '' .
He listed economic growth , unemployment , and the Middle East as challenges the two politicians would have to face .
German leader Angela Merkel stated she `` deeply appreciated '' meetings and conversations with Obama on issues including `` overcoming the global financial and economic crisis '' .
Seventeen soldiers have died today as the result of a helicopter crash in Turkey 's southeastern Siirt Province , Governor Ahmed Aydin has said .
The provincial governor added that the fatalities belonged to Turkish special forces .
The PKK seeks to increase rights for Kurdish citizens and gain autonomy in the southeast of Turkey , which is a predominantly Kurdish area .
The Turkish Government have been fighting with the PKK for decades .
Director-General of the BBC George Entwistle resigned yesterday .
Mr Entwistle earlier in the day said he would stay on as Director-General but yesterday evening he said he was doing the `` honourable thing '' by stepping down .
Earlier this week , flagship BBC investigative programme Newsnight was embroiled in controversy as it was revealed the programme had wrongly implied former Conservative chairman Lord McAlpine had been involved in child abuse at a children 's home in Wales .
Steve Messham said the man he had identified as abusing him in the 1970s at Bryn Estyn children 's home was not Lord McAlpine .
Although Newsnight did not name Lord McAlpine by name , the programme did allege a former Conservative figure had been involved in child abuse .
Allegations then surfaced on the Internet about Lord McAlpine .
Mr Entwistle said earlier yesterday that the film should not have been broadcast .
In the evening , Mr Entwistle , who started his post on September 17 , said in a statement outside Broadcasting House , `` In the light of the fact that the director general is also the editor in chief and ultimately responsible for all content , and in the light of the unacceptable journalistic standards of the Newsnight film broadcast on Friday 2 November , I have decided that the honourable thing to do is to step down from the post of director general . ''
He added that `` the wholly exceptional events of the past few weeks have led me to conclude that the BBC should appoint a new leader '' .
Chairman of the BBC Trust Lord Patten said : `` This is undoubtedly one of the saddest evenings of my public life .
... At the heart of the BBC is its role as a trusted global news organisation . ''
Israel has launched a series of airstrikes against military targets inside the Gaza Strip , killing a senior Hamas leader .
The Israeli Defense Force -LRB- IDF -RRB- launched the offensive named ` Operation Pillar of Defense ' in response to over 100 rockets fired into Israel from Gaza over the past few days .
According to reports , the IDF bombed at least 20 underground locations believed to house an array of long range missiles which the IDF says have the ability to reach Tel Aviv and used tanks to fire on targets .
The bombings also killed Hamas commander Ahmed Jabari , who was in charge of Izz el-Deen Al-Qassam , the armed division of Hamas .
A short time ago we completed another phase in the operation which included 20 different targets of rocket launcher pads .
Israel is exercising its right to protect itself , and Jabari has a lot of Israeli blood on his hands '' , said Avital Leibovich , an IDF spokesman .
The fighting could last for days with the possibility of a ground offensive by the IDF .
`` There are preparations -LSB- for ground troops -RSB- , and if we are required to , the option of a entry by ground is available , '' said Yoav Mordechai , a Brigadier-General with the IDF .
Leibovich also added that `` all options are on the table for us .
A current South Korea presidential candidate for this year 's December elections , Ahn Cheol-soo , has promised to allow freedom of choice of encryption technology for online financial transactions if he is elected .
Ahn revealed the promise in a campaign book released this Monday .
This follows over a decade of active legislation requiring banking websites to use a South Korean ActiveX technology to operate digital certificates .
South Korea developed the ActiveX certificates technology in the late 1990s with an expectation of worldwide adoption , which did not happen .
ActiveX has been supported only by Microsoft 's Internet Explorer web browser .
Ahn indicated disadvantages of the technology , writing that `` South Korea 's unique certificate system , driven by the government , has led to the isolation of South Korea 's IT -LSB- information technology -RSB- .
Excessive use of Active X is making web browsing less convenient . ''
Some commenters noted that the technology requires users to install multiple plugins for Microsoft Internet Explorer , which cause a decrease in overall computer performance .
At ZDNet Korean portal , the proposed policy change received comments about possible advances in making banking possible on mobile platforms .
The `` Al-Qassam Brigades , '' a division of Hamas , claims to have shot down an Israeli F-16 fighter jet over the Gaza Strip yesterday -LRB- Friday -RRB- .
According to some reports , Hamas captured the two pilots .
At least 50 children have died as the result of a train and bus collision in the Asyut Governorate of Egypt .
Governor Yehya Keshk has also said thirteen children were injured in the crash near the city of Manfalut , approximately 230 miles or 350 kilometres south of the Egyptian capital , Cairo .
The bus was transporting approximately sixty pre-school children , with the fatalities aged between four and six , according to BBC News Online .
Senior Health Ministry official Mamdouh al-Weshahi reported `` several deaths and injuries among the pupils '' , who `` are being counted and taken to hospitals '' .
Dr. Mohamed Samir reported witness accounts of the incident to Reuters news agency .
`` They told us the barriers were open when the bus crossed the tracks and the train collided with it , '' he said .
At least three of the journalists work for Al-Quds TV , but it is not yet known what agency the other three may work for .
Several foreign journalists have been staying in the Al-Showa building in Gaza which was damaged by the airstrike .
The Ma'an News Agency in Gaza and Al-Quds TV is also based in the media complex .
According to Ma'an , at least one missile struck the building 's eleventh floor injuring the journalists .
Canberra went into the game with a depleted roster , with six players called away to participate in national team training , suspended or out because of injury , including team captain Ellie Brush , midfielder Sally Shipard , Michelle Heyman , goalkeeper Mackenzie Arnold , striker Ashleigh Sykes , and winger Hayley Raso .
Caitlin Munoz filled in as the team 's captain in Brush 's absence , while Sally Rojahn and Catherine Brown each had their first United start and Grace Gill earned her first start of the season .
Victory coach Mike Mulvey is quoted in the Sydney Morning Herald following the game as saying , `` It 's a good win , there 's no doubt about that , but it could have been a more emphatic victory .
We put three in the back of the net , and it could easily have been double that . ''
The win moved Melbourne up to second place on the ladder , and continued the team 's dominance over Canberra who now have 1 win and 6 losses playing away in Victoria .
Later tonight , the team departs for Tokyo to compete in the International Women 's Club Championship against some of the best women 's club teams in the world including Japan 's INAC Kobe Leonessa and NTV Beleza , and France 's Olympique Lyonnais .
Israel warned Hamas yesterday to cease rocket fire and threatened a widening offensive if Hamas continues .
Hamas maintains Israel `` is the aggressor . ''
Either we go toward a calm or toward a meaningful widening of the operation ... including a possible move to achieve complete military decision '' , said Israeli Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz to IDF Radio .
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is in the region meeting with the Arab Leauge in an attempt to negotiate a ceasefire between Israel and Gaza .
There has been some optimism as Netanyahu met with his cabinet members to discuss a phased ceasefire agreement .
Yesterday night , in separate Israeli airstrikes , the offices of Agence France-Presse -LRB- AFP -RRB- and Al Jazeera English were struck or damaged in Gaza City .
The airstrike struck the Al-Showa media building , the third such strike in three days .
`` A short while ago , the IDF -LSB- Israel Defense Forces -RSB- targeted a Hamas intelligence operations center on the seventh floor of a media building in Gaza .
A direct hit was confirmed , '' said the IDF in a statement .
`` The Hamas terrorists were n't in the media building to be interviewed .
Earlier yesterday , three Palestinian journalists were killed in two separate airstrikes .
Al-Aqsa cameramen Mahmoud al-Koumi and Husam Salameh were killed when an Israeli airstrike struck their car which was reported to be marked as ` Press . '
Al-Quds Educational Radio personality Muhammad Abu Aisha was killed in the second airstrike which also struck his car .
On Sunday , at least six journalists were injured when an Israeli airstrike first struck the Al-Showa media building housing international journalists .
In an interview on the English channel of Al Jazeera , also on Monday , an Israeli government spokesperson said `` As far as I know , no foreign journalists were hurt whatsoever '' in the airstrike on Sunday .
`` I am not aware ... oh you are talking about ... first of all , maybe we have a discussion about who is a journalist , '' added the spokesperson who claims that Al-Aqsa is a Hamas control facility .
The spokesperson went on to add that , `` From our point of view , that 's not a legitimate journalist like an Al Jazeera journalist '' and that none of those injured was a `` bona fide journalist . ''
The Philippines announced today it will host a meeting on December 12 in Manila regarding territorial disputes in the South China Sea .
The meeting of deputy foreign ministers is to be attended by Brunei , Malaysia , Vietnam , and the host country .
China has previously stated it wishes to solve the disputes bilaterally instead of multilaterally .
It comes after the failure of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations -LRB- ASEAN -RRB- to produce a consensus on how to solve the disputes during a summit this month .
Current disputes in the South China Sea include areas such as the Spratly Islands and the Scarborough Shoal .
China and Taiwan each claim nearly the whole sea while the countries attending the meeting claim parts of it .
The area contains abundant fishing grounds and important shipping lanes .
A bomb exploded on a bus at approximately noon on Wednesday , near Israeli Defense Forces -LRB- IDF -RRB- headquarters .
At least 28 people were injured in the bombing .
The bus was transporting passengers on the Dan Number 142 line .
Authorities are still investigating the bombing .
Israeli police said they do n't know if the bomb was left on the bus by a departing passenger or thrown by someone outside .
`` Person who planted bomb in Tel Aviv bus yesterday-found and arrested .
He is an Arab-Israeli from Taybe & was a member of Hamas '' , said Avital Leibovich , a spokesperson for the IDF , in a statement posted to her Twitter account .
Reports say most have admitted to their involvement in the bombing .
Earlier reports , attributed to Israeli intelligence officials , suggested the bombing was the `` act of -LSB- a -RSB- lone operator '' and that the individual had no ties to a terrorist organization .
According to the driver of the bus , Nachum Herzi , no passengers prior to the explosion seemed suspicious .
Herzi recalled there were not many people on the bus and said `` I felt the explosion ... smoke was everywhere , you could n't see a thing . ''
After the explosion Herzi said he drove the bus for a few more meters until he was able to pull over and help passengers .
Although no group claimed responsibility for the bombing , Sami Abu Zuhri , a spokesman for Hamas , `` blessed '' to the bombing when saying , '' -LSB- We see -RSB- it as a natural response to the Israeli massacres ... in Gaza .
Palestinian factions will resort to all means in order to protect our Palestinian civilians in the absence of a world effort to stop the Israeli aggression . ''
An explosion partially destroyed an intelligence building in the city of Rafah , Egypt late tonight -LRB- Saturday -RRB- .
The explosion occurred just before midnight local time in Rafah .
Witnesses report a large plume of smoke rising from the location .
It is not yet known what caused the explosion , but initial reports suggested it was a bomb .
Authorities are searching the area for the possibility of more explosives .
The music video for `` Gangnam Style '' , a song by South Korean artist Psy , has become the most viewed YouTube video of all time .
The video , which now has over 816 million views since being uploaded in July , became the most watched after overtaking the music video for `` Baby '' , a song by Canadian singer Justin Bieber , which was placed on YouTube in 2010 .
`` Gangnam Style '' satirises consumerist aspects of the Gangnam District of Seoul , the South Korean capital .
The music video has influenced numerous parody versions , including one called `` Mitt Romney Style '' , which was created in the run-up to the 2012 United States presidential election .
Park Jae-Sang , Psy 's actual name , said `` Gangnam Style '' `` never targeted foreign countries .
He said his intention `` was to look uncool '' in the music video `` until the end .
The song has reached number one on music charts in about 30 countries .
Its popularity has extended as far as US President Barack Obama ; and Ban Ki-moon , the Secretary-General of the United Nations , who can be seen performing one of the dance moves to the song in the video above .
The online activist group known as Anonymous takes responsibility for the leak , which comprises over 2,000 emails and other files totaling around 1 gigabyte .
On Monday at 2030 Coordinated Universal Time -LRB- UTC -RRB- , ` Par : AnoIA , ' one of many Twitter accounts connected to Anonymous , stated that the group would `` release a stash of Syrian Government emails in the next 24h , featuring Kofi Annan correspondence , cash & weapon deliveries . ''
Three hours later the same user announced a leak of `` 1 Gigabyte -LSB- of -RSB- internal emails from -LSB- the -RSB- Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs '' onto the internet .
In the communique , the embassy confirms the Iranians are supplying helicopters and Ukrainian made weapons to Hamas , which operates mostly from the Gaza Strip in Palestine .
`` 1.2 D projectiles of Ukraine origin found in Egypt and Syria '' are some of the weapons being sent to Palestine along with `` EC725 Helicopters '' .
It also goes on to say the weapons are made in Ukraine as part of `` 2008 arms trade operations sanctioned by The -LSB- Ukrainian -RSB- Minister of Defense Anatoly Gritsenko .
Although evidence could suggest Iran 's willingness to supply arms to Hamas , in a report compiled on November 2 , by the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Emigrants , Iran is trying to stop weapons from being sent into Syria for the Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- .
The report quotes Iran 's Supreme leader Ali Khamenei , who called for the FSA `` to lay down their arms to be able to deliver their demands to the Syrian government . ''
-LRB- -LRB- ar -RRB- -RRB- Arabic language : بإلقاء السلاح لتتمكن من إيصال مطالبها إلى الحكومة السورية In regards to the civil war in Syria , Khamenei went on to say that if outside entities `` were to provide the opponents in every country of weapons from outside the country , it is natural that the regime responds to opponents '' -LRB- -LRB- ar -RRB- -RRB- Arabic language : لو تم تزويد المعارضين في كل بلد بالأسلحة من خارج البلاد فمن الطبيعي أن يتصدى النظام الحاكم للمعارضين .
`` The American audience does n't really care about reforms .
American Psyche can be easily manipulated when they hear that there are ` mistakes ' done and now we are ' ﬁxing it . '
... Its worth mentioning also what is happening now in Wall Street -LSB- Occupy Wall Street -RSB- and the way the demonstrations are been suppressed by police men , police dogs and beatings , '' wrote Jaafari .
NASA and Roscosmos have chosen the crew for a year long stay at the International Space Station .
Data collected may help in future manned exploration of the solar system .
Scott Kelly and Mikhail Korniyenko have been chosen by NASA and Roscosmos respectively .
The two are veterans of ISS spaceflight and were chosen for their station experience and skill .
The one-year increment will expand the bounds of how we live and work in space and will increase our knowledge regarding the effects of microgravity on humans as we prepare for future missions beyond low-Earth orbit '' said NASA administrator William Gerstenmaier .
The pair are to launch sometime in the spring of 2015 from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan and return in spring 2016 .
Possible NASA deep space mission destinations include near earth asteroids , the Moon , and Mars .
The users can transfer data to an Android phone using a touch-card to make it available online .
The data include walking , temperature , and shaking motion statistics .
The users can manually enter additional data such as food quantities , weight , custom notes , and photos .
Fujitsu said , `` The data are presented graphically on a custom website that makes trends in the dog 's activities easy to understand at a glance .
This helps owners get a stronger sense of their dog 's health , while enabling communication with the dog . ''
An estimated over 100,000 people protested in Tahrir Square yesterday in opposition to a constitutional decree made by Egypt 's President Mohamed Morsi .
Riot police dispersed the crowd with tear gas as clashes began .
The constitutional decree made November 22 by Morsi protected the constitution drafting body of Egypt from dissolution and also protected executive decisions from being overturned .
The decree has sparked protests and strikes reminiscent of protests which eventually toppled the then president Hosni Mubarak .
Mohamed ElBaradei said Morsi is acting like a `` new pharaoh '' .
In a comment to Der Spiegel , he said , `` Not even the pharaohs had so much authority , to say nothing of his predecessor Hosni Mubarak .
This is a catastrophe , it -LSB- is -RSB- a mockery of the revolution that brought him to power . ''
Morsi has stated the decree is temporary .
Sandra Fluke was the focus of media in February after attempting to testify before a Republican-controlled committee in the United States House of Representatives about contraception and women 's health .
Kate Pickert of Time wrote in her profile , `` Fluke ... weathered the attention with poise and maturity and emerged as a political celebrity . ''
Fluke responded to the nomination via Twitter , and stated she was `` Honored to be listed for Time 's Person of Year '' .
An analysis of Fluke 's candidacy by Peter Roff of U.S. News & World Report called attention to her role in the political phenomenon in the recent election cycle known as the `` War on Women '' which drew significant attention to issues of women 's rights .
Roff gave advice to the Republican party on the way it relates to women , `` Once the Republicans become comfortable talking about all issues as though they were women 's issues too -- issues like unemployment , economic growth , job creation , education , and healthcare as well as the so-called social issues -- they will be demonstrating that women have a home in the GOP .
Until they do however it will be the Sandra Flukes of the world that continue to carry the day when it counts . ''
Marshall argued Fluke belongs on the list : `` She should be credited with reminding women on both the right and the left ; that many of us agree on the issue of women 's reproductive rights .
Fluke was a featured speaker on September 5 at the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte , North Carolina .
Fluke spoke to attendees at the convention about the consequences for women of electing Republican candidate for U.S. President , Mitt Romney , over incumbent President Barack Obama .
Fluke has campaigned with President Obama in his bid for re-election .
Fluke received a nomination in March as a candidate for Time magazine 's 100 most influential people in the world .
Revealed during a press conference at the Qatar National Convention Centre , the car in addition to an internal combustion engine , includes an automotive thermoelectric generator designed to capture waste heat to produce hydrogen .
GORD expects the heat waste collecting system to be compatible with any gasoline or compressed natural gas car .
GORD chairman Dr Al-Horr summarised the key concepts of the invention in a statement saying , `` Our car produces electricity at no cost by capturing thermal waste energy , reducing costs and eliminating the need for an external source of electricity .
Also , bulky compressed-hydrogen cylinders are a thing of the past , as our concept accomplishes the production of hydrogen by using water through fuel cells integrated within the car . ''
Most of the energy in Qatari vehicle comes from the the car 's gasoline tank , supplemented by a thin film photo-voltaic panel on the roof .
Normally in a combustion engine , chemical energy stored in a fuel , such as gasoline , is converted into heat energy through combustion .
This heat energy is then converted into mechanical energy , manifested as an increase in pressure in the combustion chamber due to the kinetic energy of the combustion gases .
The kinetic energy of these combustion gases are then converted into work ; because of the inefficiencies in converting chemical energy into useful work , internal combustion engines have a theoretical maximum effiecincy of 37 % -LRB- with what is achievable in day to day applications being about half of this -RRB- .
Of the chemical energy in the consumed fuel used by an internal combustion engine 40 % is dissipated as waste heat .
However , the Qatari vehicle uses a thermoelectric generator to convert this waste heat into electricity .
Such generators are used in space vehicles , and produce electricity when thermoelectric materials are subjected to a temperature gradient , the greater the gradient the greater the amount of electrcity produced .
In the GORD vehicle the electricity produced is used to electrolyse potable water to produce hydrogen which can be introduced into the vehicle 's existing fuel system .
The researchers showed that the heat waste collection engine caused a decrease in the car 's emissions , including a decrease of carbon monoxide and nitrous oxide emissions by more than 50 % , the fuel efficiency increasing by 20 % .
On its website , GORD said that the heat waste collector engine is universal , `` Any car can be adapted to accommodate the system as it does n't alter any electro-mechanical systems '' .
The music video for `` Gangnam Style '' , a song by South Korean artist Psy , has become the first YouTube video to surpass one billion views .
The video , which was uploaded to the video sharing website on July 15 , became the most viewed of all time last month after overtaking the music video for `` Baby '' , a song by Canadian singer Justin Bieber , which was placed on YouTube two years ago .
With more than 6.1 million likes , Guinness World Records has recognised `` Gangnam Style '' as being the most liked YouTube video ever ; it also has over 449,000 dislikes .
` officialpsy ' , the YouTube channel upon which the video was uploaded , now has in excess of 2.1 million subscribers and has achieved over 1.4 billion video views overall .
According to Google , the company which owns YouTube , the video has attracted between seven and ten million daily views on average since being uploaded to the site .
Park Jae-Sang , the actual name of Psy , explained the meaning of the song in an August 2012 interview with CNN .
`` People who are actually from Gangnam never proclaim that they are -- it 's only the posers and wannabes that put on these airs and say that they are ` Gangnam Style ' -- so this song is actually poking fun at those kinds of people who are trying so hard to be something that they 're not '' , he said .
Despite its international popularity , in a separate interview with Reuters earlier in August , Park Jae-Sang said `` Gangnam Style '' -- a satire of consumerist aspects of the Gangnam District of the South Korean capital of Seoul -- `` never targeted foreign countries .
`` Gangnam Style '' has inspired countless parody versions , prompting UK newspaper The Daily Telegraph to suggest it was `` the most parodied video ever '' .
Among the parody versions are one performed by inmates of the Philippines ' Cebu Provincial Detention and Rehabilitation Center , one with students from Eton College in the United Kingdom , one from Chinese artist Ai Weiwei and one created in the approach to the 2012 United States presidential election called `` Mitt Romney Style '' .
According to Police Captain David Lindaman , Perkins and Belcher got into an argument at their house and Belcher shot Perkins around 7:50 A.M. CT. .
After shooting Perkins , Belcher headed to the Chiefs training facility where he talked to Chiefs General Manger Scott Pioli and Head Coach Romeo Crennel .
Belcher thanked them for their support and then proceeded to shoot himself .
Owner of the Kansas City Chiefs Clark Hunt released a statement regarding Belcher .
He said `` The entire Chiefs family is deeply saddened by today 's events , and our collective hearts are heavy with sympathy , thoughts and prayers for the families and friends affected by this unthinkable tragedy .
`` TransCanada Corporation did n't bother to ask the people of this neighborhood if they wanted to have millions of gallons of poisonous tar sands pumped through their backyards , '' said one of the protesters inside the pipeline , Matt Almonte in a statement posted to the group 's website .
`` This multinational corporation has bullied landowners and expropriated homes to fatten its bottom line '' , added Almonte .
Glen Collins , the second protester said , `` I 'm barricading this pipe with Tar Sands Blockade today to say loud and clear to the extraction industry that our communities and the resources we depend on for survival are not collateral damage . ''
According to their website www.tarsandsblockade.org , Almonte and Collins entered the pipeline prior to about 7:30 a.m. local time .
They went 25 feet into the pipeline and took with them two barrels filled with cement , weighing 600 pounds each and locked themselves in between them .
At around noon , police on scene entered the section of pipe , only to emerge a few minutes later without the protesters .
At 12:30 , after an ambulance arrived on scene , police once again entered the pipe and began to pull on one of the barrels .
A short time later a third protester , identified as Isabel Indigo Brooks , was also arrested .
In a statement to Wikinews , spokesperson for TransCanada Grady Semmens called the incident `` unfortunate '' saying , `` This project is about supplying Canadian and American oil to U.S. refineries , pushing out more expensive crude oil from foreign regimes that do not support American values of freedom and common sense -- Libya , Venezuela and the Middle East . ''
He also confirmed that construction was halted and staff members were `` instructed to stand down and stop all work until local law enforcement resolved -LSB- the -RSB- situation '' .
`` It is unfortunate these protestors are trying to keep thousands of Americans from the jobs they depend on to provide for their families .
This project is important not only to thousands of workers but also to Americans in general , '' added Semmens .
Construction on portions of the pipeline were halted in January when the White House denied permits for it to be finished .
`` This announcement is not a judgment on the merits of the pipeline , but the arbitrary nature of a deadline that prevented the State Department from gathering the information necessary to approve the project and protect the American people , '' said President Barack Obama in January .
Western Australian Paralympic bronze medalist Janet Shaw has died following a long battle with cancer .
Janet said losing her eyesight was the best thing that ever happened to her because it eventually led her to where she was standing , waiting to achieve glory in Athens .
That quote has stayed with me ever since .
In late November , another Australian Paralympian , Peter Marsh of Queensland , died at the age of 64 .
An inch of snow fell on Copper Mountain and Vail Sunday night , one -- two inches less than forecast .
The weather conditions are not expected to improve to bring snow bearing conditions for a while as the area experiences day time temperatures in the 50s ° F/10s ° C.
Copper Mountain required use of snow machines to keep snow on their ski runs .
Currently , the snow is machine groomed and the majority of ski lifts and trails are not open .
In the United Kingdom , Lancashire Constabulary have charged television and radio presenter Stuart Hall with three counts of indecent assault offences .
The charges relate to complaints about alleged events between 1974 and 1984 involving three females between eight and seventeen years of age .
Hall has been released on bail and is expected to appear at Preston Magistrates ' Court January 7 .
Lancashire Constabulary described the nature of the allegations as `` historic '' and said the suspect was being interrogated at a police station today .
John Dilworth , from the Crown Prosecution Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- , said `` there is sufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and ... it is in the public interest to prosecute this case . ''
Hall notably presented UK game show It 's a Knockout .
He has recently been featuring as an association football commentator on BBC Radio 5 Live , although the corporation said he was not scheduled to present at the station this weekend .
At least two people in Cairo , Egypt have died after clashes at the presidential palace broke out between supporters and opponents of president Mohamed Morsi .
On Tuesday night , opponents of Morsi set up tents and began camping outside the palace .
On Wednesday , reports say supporters of Morsi stormed the encampment and tore down tents belonging to opponents and attacked them .
Some threw rocks at them while others threw molotov cocktails , forcing opponents to retreat .
Protests both in support of and opposing Morsi broke out around Egypt after he enacted new powers on November 22 that include making his decisions free from judicial oversight .
A referendum is to be presented on December 15 outlining a new constitution for the country .
After graduating cum laude with her J.D. degree this past May , Fluke successfully took and passed the bar exam in July and is now an attorney .
In an interview with the Lincoln Journal Star , Fluke reflected on her role as a public figure and her ability to contribute to the contribute to the discourse about women 's rights , `` It 's uplifting and heartening to see how many people really care about the issues I 'm talking about . ''
Fluke observed , `` I think it 's also allowed me to give a voice and shine a light on the work that a lot of people are doing . ''
Fluke 's speech centered on women 's rights , women 's healthcare , and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act .
She stressed the importance of women 's issues in the recent election for U.S. President : `` This year , something changed in our national conversation about women 's health ... .
Before my time , women 's healthcare has never decided a presidential election .
She spurred on attendees of the event to become more active in supporting women 's rights : `` It 's time for young women in this country to join the fight , because it 's our rights and our health that are at stake . ''
Planned Parenthood regional development and planned gifts director Tari Hendrickson told the Lincoln Journal Star Sandra Fluke was her top choice for keynote speaker at the event : `` Sandra was No. 1 on my list ; I never had a No. 2 .
Planned Parenthood of the Heartland Planned Nebraska communications manager Susan Allen told the Daily Nebraskan Sandra Fluke was the ideal person to serve as keynote speaker : `` She is a wonderfully outspoken person on the affordable care act , women 's health and women 's rights .
We decided she would be the perfect person to speak to Planned Parenthood supporters . ''
Time concluded Fluke helped give U.S. President Barack Obama an edge in his presidential re-election campaign .
At least four tanks and several armored personnel carriers -LRB- APC -RRB- have been deployed outside the presidential palace in Cairo , Egypt following clashes between supporters and opponents of president Mohamed Morsi where as many as six people were killed .
More than 700 others have been reported injured .
Opponents of Morsi began camping outside the palace on Tuesday night after hundreds of thousands protested new presidential decrees in Tahrir Square .
On Wednesday , supporters of Morsi stormed the encampment and tore down tents belonging to opponents and attacked them .
Clashes continued into the early morning hours before subsiding .
`` I 've seen Molotov cocktails , people armed with iron bars and rocks , some people even pulling branches off of trees in terms of trying to find some kind of weapon to fight with '' , said Elizabeth Arrott , a reporter with Voice of America who was at the palace when clashes were taking place .
Several journalists were also reported attacked in the clashes .
People on each side have blamed the other for starting the violence .
Hisham Kandil , Egypt 's prime minister , called for calm , to `` give the opportunity for the efforts being made now to begin a national dialogue '' .
The Capitals shot poorly , with a team average of 30 % from field goal range , ultimately going 21/70 .
In contrast , Sydney shot 54 % , 36/67 from field goal range .
Canberra was worse from three point range , going 3/11 compared to the Flames who shot 8/15 .
The Flames had several players in double digits , including April Sykes with 29 , Alicia Poto with 15 , and Rohanee Cox with 14 .
Sydney also dominated in other key statistics , including total rebounds with 36 to the Capitals ' 28 , steals with 12 to Canberra 's 2 , and blocks with 7 to the Capitals ' 5 .
The Capitals turned the ball over more than Sydney , with 22 to the Flames ' 11 .
Canberra 's loss continues their loosing streak , now sitting at four in a row .
Canberra had off court problems in the game against Sydney with Michelle Cosier and Alexandra Bunton both dealing with illness .
The Capitals will not be able to count on Lauren Jackson coming back any time soon , as she is out until at least after Christmas with a hamstring injury .
Canberra 's poor performance comes at a time when the team 's head coach , Carrie Graf , is under scrutiny .
The previous Australian women 's national basketball team coach , Jan Stirling , has suggested perhaps Graf should take leave from the team during Olympic and World Championship years , as part of analysis following the national team 's performance at the London Olympics .
Graf 's coaching contracts with the national team and the Capitals both finish at the end of the year , and she is currently negotiating for a new deal with Basketball Australia that may create a situation where she is ineligible to coach for the Capitals because the national team position may become a full time one .
United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has called yesterday -LRB- Friday -RRB- for an end to violence which has taken place in Northern Ireland this week , following the decision of Belfast City Council to stop flying the Union Flag year round .
Clinton , who was on a visit to Belfast as part of a four-day tour of Europe , said that violence `` is never an acceptable response to disagreements . ''
At a press conference also attended by Northern Ireland First Minister Peter Robinson and Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness , Clinton condemned the violence : `` We have seen this week the work is not complete and I join in condemning the recent attacks , '' she said .
She also called for all Northern Ireland parties `` to confront the remaining challenge of sectarian divisions , peacefully together '' .
This week 's outbreak of violence in Northern Ireland followed the decision by Belfast City Council to only fly the Union Flag on certain designated days , instead of all-year round , as is currently the case .
Although nationalists on the council had wanted the flag removed completely , Alliance persuaded them to vote for their compromise proposal , whereby the flag would only be flown on certain designated days per year .
Alliance MP for East Belfast Naomi Long has received death threats , which Clinton called `` unacceptable '' .
A Carrickfergus Alliance party office was set on fire and two Bangor councillors ' homes were attacked .
Hillary Clinton and her husband Bill Clinton have visited Northern Ireland several times previously .
Bill Clinton played a key part in convincing both sides in the conflict to agree to end the violence .
There is now speculation as to whether Clinton will launch another presidential bid , following her failed campaign in 2008 , when she was beaten to the Democratic Party nomination by Barack Obama .
Several international figures have said they would support her presidential candidacy , including former UK prime minister Tony Blair , and Jordanian minister Nasser Judeh .
57 % of those polled in a recent survey by the Washington Post indicated that they would support Clinton 's candidacy although she has denied that she is planning to run .
Yesterday , Pema Dorje , 23 , and Kunchok Phelgye , 24 , died after they set themselves on fire in front of monasteries in northeastern and eastern Tibet .
Then today , Bhenchen Kyi , 17 , died after she set herself on fire in the Tsekhog , Rebkong region .
The deaths are described as self-immolations , where a person or persons set themselves on fire as a form of protest , often resulting in death .
The first Tibetan reported case happened in 2009 when a monk named ` Tapey ' set himself on fire in Kirti Gompa .
Since then , reportedly at least 95 people have attempted self-immolation , 28 of those in November of this year .
Authorities say the self-immolations may be incited and as a result , have arrested two men believed to be connected to the cases .
Today , Chinese authorities announced the arrests of Lorang Konchok , 40 , and his nephew Lorang Tsering , 31 , who were arrested in August .
Konchok is a Monk working at a monastery in Sichuan .
In a confession Konchol claims he was working on orders from the Dalai Lama and his followers .
He also says he recruited Tsering to help instigate the incidents , telling potential individuals they would be `` heroes '' if they went through with the immolation .
Authorities say the two men were attempting to persuade more people to go through with the immolations , but those people backed out after police , family members , and government officials intervened .
Lobsang Choedak , a spokesperson for the Tibetan government in exile in India , denies the allegations against Konchok and Tsering saying , `` We believe -LSB- the suspects -RSB- have been forced to make these confessions .
We would welcome the Chinese government investigating whether we are instigating these immolations . ''
John A. Yervelli Jr. , 48 , was arrested and charged with public lewdness .
According to police , a truck driver was driving eastbound on the expressway when Yervelli pulled up to his window .
According to the truck driver , Yervelli was naked from the waist down and making `` lewd gestures '' to him .
The truck driver called police who stopped Yervelli 's car at the Hamburg toll plaza and detained him .
Yervelli denies the charges .
If you are suspected of committing a crime , and we have enough reasonable cause to do so , we are going to do our job and make an arrest , '' said Lieutenant David Denz of the New York state police department to WGRZ 's ' 2 On Your Side . '
North Korea has successfully launched a long range rocket .
The launch occurred at 9:51 a.m. local time according to South Korea 's Yonhap news agency , two days after the country said it might delay the launch until as late as December 29 to repair a `` technical deficiency '' in the rocket .
`` The rocket stages fell on areas in line with its earlier announcement and the launch appears to be successful , '' said a South Korean military official as quoted by Yonhap .
North American Aerospace Defense Command -LRB- NORAD -RRB- also confirmed the successful launch in a statement saying , `` Initial indications are that the first stage fell into the Yellow Sea .
The second stage was assessed to fall into the Philippine Sea .
Initial indications are that the missile deployed an object that appeared to achieve orbit . ''
Pieces of the rocket stages reportedly fell into the sea near the coast of the Philippines .
North Korea says the Unha-3 rocket carried a Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 weather satellite which was successfully placed into orbit .
`` The second version of satellite Kwangmyongsong-3 successfully lifted off from the Sohae Space Center by carrier rocket Unha-3 on Wednesday .
The satellite entered its preset orbit , '' said the North Korean government in a statement via the Korean Central News Agency .
This is the second long range rocket North Korea fired this year .
In April , the country failed at an attempt to launch a multistage rocket into orbit in honor of the anniversary of Kim Il-sung 's 100th birthday .
The government publicly acknowledged its rocket broke up in flight over ocean waters before ever making it into orbit .
Monday , Australian para-alpine skiers competed at the IPC Nor-Am Cup at Copper Mountain .
The competition 's first event was the Super G held at Rosie 's Race Arena .
Monday , Canadian para-alpine skiers competed at the IPC Nor-Am Cup at Copper Mountain .
On Monday , Japanese para-alpine skiers competed at the IPC Nor-Am Cup at Copper Mountain .
Mitchell Gourley finished with a combined total time of 1:58.99 , Toby Kane finished with a combined total time of 1:59.00 , and Cameron Rahles Rahbula finished with a combined total time of 2:00.51 .
Visually impaired skier Jonathan Walsh and his guide Jonathan Wong also took to the podium for the standing men 's giant slalom visually impaired event , with a combined total time of 2:15.64 .
106 competitors , 29 women and 77 men , from countries such as Argentina , Australia , Canada , Chile , Great Britain , Iceland , Japan , Mexico , New Zealand , South Africa , Turkey , and the United States competed in the Super G on the second day of the IPC Nor-Am Cup .
Before turning the gun on himself , a 20-year-old male opened fire at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown , Connecticut , killing 28 people , 20 of them children ranging from five to ten years old .
The New York Post identifies the shooter as 20-year-old Adam Lanza .
His motives are not yet clear , but reports say his mother Nancy , who was also killed , may have been the target .
United States president Barack Obama spoke in a televised address saying , `` The majority of those who died today were children -- beautiful little kids between the ages of 5 and 10 years old .
Among the fallen were also teachers -- men and women who devoted their lives to helping our children fulfill their dreams .
`` So our hearts are broken today -- for the parents and grandparents , sisters and brothers of these little children , and for the families of the adults who were lost .
Our hearts are broken for the parents of the survivors as well , for as blessed as they are to have their children home tonight , they know that their children 's innocence has been torn away from them too early , and there are no words that will ease their pain . ''
According to The New York Times and Danbury Hospital 's Facebook page , the hospital is treating three of the shooting victims .
Adam and his brother Peter , also a former professional footballer , were in the accident after failure of a tire on the BMW X5 Adam was reportedly driving .
Reports also suggest an unidentified female passenger may have died in the accident .
George Bhebhe , a friend of Adam , spoke to The Zimbabwean about the circumstances of the accident .
He said `` Adam died early this morning when their vehicle veered off the road after a tyre burst and hit a tree 20 km from Victoria Falls .
But arrangements still being made to transfer from there to a hospital in Bulawayo or Harare '' .
Both Adam and Peter played for the Zimbabwe national football team and Peter is their all time top goalscorer .
During his career Peter played in the English Premier League and played for Coventry , Sheffield United , Birmingham , and Huddersfield .
Sheffield United tweeted `` Our thoughts are with former player Peter Ndlovu , who has been critically injured in a car accident in his native Zimbabwe .
Judge James A. Stoelker of Santa Clara County , California Superior Court was disqualified from hearing a case on predatory lending practices the day before Christmas , on a technicality .
The case was filed by David and Salma Merritt of Santa Clara County against multiple defendants , including Countrywide , Bank of America , and First American Title , among others .
The events leading to this case began in 2006 when the Merritts accepted a home loan from Countrywide .
At that time , Countrywide was advertising 30-year mortgages at between 1 and 3 percent interest .
The Merritts received a `` good faith estimate '' consistent with those advertisements .
They claim that Countrywide representatives tricked them into signing loan documents that were subsequently altered to appear to commit them to an obligation they had not agreed to .
Theirs was the only case heard in Department 9 that morning in recognition of Christmas .
That hearing was scheduled , because the Sixth District of the California Court of Appeals -LRB- case number H038883 -RRB- required the Santa Clara County Superior Court to -LRB- a -RRB- give all parties an opportunity to be heard regarding the possible disqualification of Judge Stoelker and -LRB- b -RRB- reply to the appellate court by December 26 .
This appellate ruling was only issued on November 26 , and Judge Mark H. Pierce did not schedule the required hearing until December 12 .
The notice for this hearing required parties to file responses ten days before , which meant that the parties only had two days to prepare their replies .
On August 16 , the Merritts learned Judge Stoelker had represented defendants in this case on numerous occasions before he was appointed to the bench in December 2010 and had not disclosed this fact to the Merritts .
The next day they filed a Verified Statement of Disqualification asking Stoekler to recuse himself .
The California Code of Civil Procedure -LRB- CCP -RRB- 170.3 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- and -LRB- 4 -RRB- -LSB- confirmed in the 1988 appellate decision in Lewis v. Superior Court -RSB- give a judge ten days to respond to to such a motion .
Stoelker replied on the eleventh day .
`` All Rise '' was heard at 9:04 AM local time Monday morning , whereupon Judge Pierce entered the courtroom .
Attending by phone were attorneys James Goldberg representing Bank of America and Brian Craft representing First American Title .
Goldberg had filed a brief asserting that the Merritts ' Verified Statement of Disqualification was served upon Judge Stoelker on August 17 but was not filed , as witnessed by the fact that it was not listed on the docket .
Judge Pierce reported that he had checked the files and found that this Statement had indeed been filed , and he did n't know why it was not on the docket .
Attorney Goldberg suggested that the fact that the Statement was not on the docket may have contributed to Judge Stoelker 's failure to respond within the ten day limit .
Attorney Craft asked about next steps , since all action in this case had been stayed by the appellate court pending resolution of this issue .
Judge Pierce then replied that Judge Manoukian would be handling discovery in this case , replacing Judge Stoelker in that capacity .
He further stated that a reply to the appellate court had been prepared concurring with the appellate court 's disqualification of Judge Stoelker and asked Mr. Merritt to retrieve that order from the clerk in the courtroom and file it as usual with the clerk 's office .
He also noted that this action would lift the stay .
Other actions in this case could now proceed with the next steps being scheduled January 22 , 2013 , or later .
The first reversal came on December 19 , 2011 , when the appellate court reinstated Wells Fargo as a defendant .
At least two journalists were released after being held captive in Syria for approximately five days according to NBC News .
Turkish journalist Aziz Akyavaş and US journalist Richard Engel went missing on Thursday .
`` After being kidnapped and held for five days inside Syria by an unknown group , NBC News Chief Foreign Correspondent Richard Engel and his production crew members have been freed unharmed .
We are pleased to report they are safely out of the country , '' said NBC News in a statement on their website .
Earlier NTV , the Turkish language partner of MSNBC , reported Akyavaş may have been `` arrested and detained in Syria '' -LRB- -LRB- tr -RRB- -RRB- Turkish language : Suriye ` de tutuklanıp tutuklanmadığına , but they also added , '' -LSB- we -RSB- do not have any information yet . ''
-LRB- -LRB- tr -RRB- -RRB- Turkish language : henüz herhangi bir bilgi yok The Kuwait News Agency reported Akyavaş may have been kidnapped , but also reported Engel was the one who announced Akyavaş was missing .
The journalists went missing after crossing into Syria from the Turkish border .
NBC News says Engel and others were tied up , blindfolded , and put in the back of a truck and driven to possibly near the Syrian town of Ma'arrat Misrin .
When they were moved to another location , the kidnappers accidentally approached a Syrian rebel checkpoint and a gunfight broke out .
Two unnamed captors were killed in the attack , but Engel and others were able to escape .
No one has claimed responsibility for the kidnapping and no one was injured .
NBC News never had contact with their captors and a ransom demand was never made .
At first , NBC did n't officially acknowledge either of the journalists were missing and according to Gawker , they website was `` subject to a news blackout -- one to which Gawker agreed until now -- for at least the past 24 hours . ''
Engel is a regular user of the social networking website Twitter and has not posted a ` Tweet ' since December 6 .
His last official report was filed on December 11 .
In February , Wikinews reported journalists were apparently targeted in Syrian government attacks , and some of them killed .
On February 9 , a Syrian citizen journalist named ` Omar ' was airing a live feed of the bombardment of Homs when several rockets struck near the camera 's position , nearly destroying it .
On February 21 , a member of the Homs Media Center was killed by a rocket as Syrian forces continued their bombardment of the city for an eighteenth straight day .
A day later , Marie Colvin , a Sunday Times journalist , and award winning French photographer Rémi Ochlik , were killed when rockets again hit the media center .
In a study published on October 29 , Spanish researchers studied Singapore rhododendron interaction with ants .
The researchers discovered that the flower produces substances to attract weaver ants to drive away the smaller Nomia bees , which are a worse pollinator than larger carpenter bees .
The ants do n't drive away the larger bees , which pollinate the flowers and visit them more often as they get better .
By doing field observations in Singapore I realized that the aggressive weaver ant , Oecophylla smaragdina , spent a lot of time on rhododendron flowers causing different responses in their floral visitors .
While the presence of the weaver ants on flowers deterred small floral visitors , large carpenter bees were unaffected by the presence of the ants .
Francisco G. Gonzálvez : Mostly the study involved many hours fieldwork .
We quantified bee visit rates at plant with and without ant nests , assessed the pollination effectiveness of the different flower visitors , examined the association between weaver ant presence ant fruit an seed set and finally we tested whether weaver ants were attracted to flowers .
Francisco G. Gonzálvez : The experiments and observations in field were conducted from April to June 2010 in MacRitchie Reservoir , Singapore .
However , the activity that took most time and attention was to determine pollen production per flower in order to evaluate pollination effectiveness of the floral visitors .
`` Flowers attract weaver ants that deter less effective pollinators '' -- Wiley Online Library , October 29 , 2012
`` We have received overwhelming support for donations to be given to various groups supporting the Newtown community , veterans groups like the Wounded Warrior Project , and LGBT groups like The Trevor Project '' , said Jeffrey Lyon , Certified Information Systems Security Professional with the Black Lotus team , to Wikinews .
Lyon also says The United Way may be the first charity to receive their donation .
`` We 've not -LSB- yet -RSB- made a formal decision , '' Lyon noted , but the company `` supports all of these groups and will give very serious consideration in ensuring that our donations have a strong impact . ''
The announcement comes after the internet activist group known as Anonymous called on the companies that host and protect the Church 's website to discontinue providing services to them after the Church announced their decision to protest funerals of those killed in the December 14 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown , Connecticut .
According to Lyon the company decided to donate revenue made from WBC to charity after , '' ` Anonymous ' supporters began a full blown Twitter campaign boycotting any company who provides services to WBC . ''
Lyon also said the company , `` reached out to Anonymous spokespersons and asked their opinions on how the matter should be handled . ''
As part of the operation , the Church 's website was defaced and taken offline for most of the day Monday .
Twitter accounts belonging to Shirley Phelps-Roper , the Church 's spokeswoman , and leader Fred Phelps , were hacked and taken over by Anonymous .
`` As a security service , we value freedom of expression ... and have mandate to guarantee passage of data across the internet , which ultimately means that companies like Black Lotus should not interrupt services based solely on public opinion .
This logic did not add up for us '' , Lyon added .
He would not elaborate on how long WBC has sought the services of Black Lotus , but stated , `` they did not come to us because of any one specific attack . ''
Lyon did n't state how much revenue is made from WBC , but he added the amount they receive `` from WBC is very small . ''
As a result , Lyon says the company will `` actually make donations well in excess '' of the fees WBC pays .
Wikinews has contacted the WBC for a statement , but as of this report , no response has been received .
For now , Lyon states only revenue received from the WBC will be considered for donation , but they hope the project can be expanded to include other customers .
`` While we 're attributing this specific decision to WBC , our long term plan is to expand our philanthropy program to substantially offset any harm that may have been caused by those serving content over our network '' , said Lyon .
The company hopes to formally announce their decisions in a press release at the end of the week .
Downed lamposts and trees were reported in multiple locales .
One media source reported overturned playground equipment in the city of Rockwall .
Late Wednesday evening , the National Weather Service reported winds at Dallas Love Field up to 66 mph .
The city of Edgewood recorded wind speeds up to 70 mph during the storm ; three homes , two barns and two business buildings sustained damage .
A home in Chandler was damaged when a tree was toppled during the storm -LRB- see photo at left -RRB- .
Dust from as far away as west Texas covered vehicles and other property early Thursday morning in the eastern part of the state .
A car wash manager in Tyler told media his business cleaned about three hundred cars on Thursday , busier than usual even for holiday season .
The Nissan , which was carrying five occupants , overturned and came to rest on its roof .
Three male Buddhist monks who sat in the back of the car died at the site of the crash .
The female driver of the vehicle managed to get out of the vehicle herself but another male passenger in the front of the car had to be cut free by fire service members .
The two front-seat passengers as well as the male driver of the Škoda were hospitalised at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh , although none of their injuries are considered likely to be fatal .
`` This is a tragic incident , '' Inspector Simon Bradshaw of Lothian and Borders Police said , `` and we are currently in the process of carrying out inquiries in order to establish the full circumstances of the collision . ''
The A68 road close to the location of the accident was temporarily closed to allow police to investigate the incident , with traffic redirected to the B6370 road via the town of Gorebridge .
Oxfam , an international organisation intending to eliminate poverty , has criticised the way in which Africa is depicted to United Kingdom -LRB- UK -RRB- audiences .
In a press release , the charity said the continent was being portrayed in an `` overwhelmingly negative '' way which is `` undermining popular support for efforts to bring an end to hunger on the continent '' .
Dame Barbara Stocking , CEO of Oxfam , has said the way in which the continent is being depicted to UK audiences `` is obscuring the progress that is being made towards a more secure and prosperous future '' .
Oxfam cited a survey of 2000 people conducted by marketing research company YouGov , suggesting three fifths of people have become less sensitive towards footage containing persons suffering from such problems as drought , disease and hunger , while 23 % avoid looking at footage of this nature upon sighting it .
Oxfam said the way in which broadcast media portrays developing nations , including those in Africa , was perceived to be `` depressing , manipulative and hopeless '' by those surveyed .
Stocking believes `` it 's a natural instinct to turn away from suffering when you feel you can do nothing to alleviate it . ''
47 % of respondents considered hunger to be one of the three largest issues for Africa next year .
43 % of respondents thought media portrayal of conditions for persons living in developing areas suggested no hope for improvement .
In the 2011 Human Development Report , published by the United Nations Development Programme , over three fourths of the 46 countries ranked under the ` Low Human Development ' category -- the lowest-ranking category in the Human Development Index -- were African .
The Democratic Republic of the Congo ranked lowest on the list ; the other fourteen entries in the bottom fifteen of this category were all African nations .
Stocking has said Oxfam does not mean to `` gloss over '' issues surrounding African citizens at a significant risk of harm and stressed that malnutrition rates `` remain stubbornly high '' .
However , of people surveyed only one fifth believed they could actively assist in eliminating food poverty in Africa .
Meanwhile , 74 % believed it is possible to eventually resolve the issue of hunger in Africa .
'' -LSB- W -RSB- e 've come a long way since the 1980s and Band Aid 's Do They Know It 's Christmas ?
Band Aid , a charity supergroup created by Bob Geldof and Midge Ure , was formed following the broadcasting of footage of Ethiopian citizens experiencing a famine in the mid 1980s .
At least one person has been killed and at least thirty were injured as the result of a fire in the city of Lagos in Nigeria after an explosion in a building with fireworks stored in it .
As many as nine other buildings in the Lagos Island fire yesterday were also impacted by the flames , according to authorities .
Some local residents reportedly jumped out of the windows of buildings in fright in the large commercial area of Jankara .
One man , Wasiu Olaleye , required treatment for a cut to his leg because `` I had to jump from the first floor to save my life '' , he said .
Some local businesses were open when the incident occurred , but yesterday was a public holiday in Nigeria .
A school located in close proximity to the warehouse was significantly damaged in the incident .
The windows of several nearby buildings were also destroyed as the fire caused the windows of houses a few miles away to shake .
Thick smoke was also sighted above Lagos .
Crowds of thousands of nearby people accumulated near the fire , with spectators and individuals intending to assist or gain information about relatives amongst them .
Three fire service tanker vehicles attended the scene , but used up all their water supplies .
Some people in the crowd attempted to assist fire crews with holding fire hoses and gathering water-filled containers .
Some of these people were taken to hospital for treatment after experiencing injuries .
One official reported military assistance was used .
Additional water arrived later , as the severity of the fire slowly decreased .
The large crowds were part of the reason it took around an hour for fire service members to reach the scene of the fire .
News agency Reuters was told by a government official that the possibility of further explosions from fireworks also interfered with the fire service 's rescue operation .
`` It 's very dangerous for the firemen to go in , because the government do n't want any of these men to be injured '' , they said .
Ibrahim Farinloye from the National Emergency Management Agency reported one fatality to Agence France-Presse -LRB- AFP -RRB- , saying : `` We pulled out a body from the building '' .
Nicolas Adesile , of the Red Cross , told the same news agency that as many as thirty people have been treated thus far .
The Islamic Republic of Iran says it is conducting naval drills in the Strait of Hormuz .
According to the Iranian navy 's Habibollah Sayyari , the `` Velayat 91 '' drills -- to be held for a six day period ending on Wednesday -- are intended to showcase `` the armed forces ' military capabilities . ''
Iran 's state-run media reports that the Iranian government warns all ships to stay away until the end of the exercises .
According to this report the drills -- which began on Friday -- are to be conducted over roughly half a million square miles -LRB- a million square kilometers -RRB- of waters stretching from the Strait of Hormuz to the northern part of the Indian Ocean which includes the Gulf of Oman .
According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration , 17 million barrels of oil passes through this part of the Persian Gulf per day .
That is nearly 20 % of the worldwide oil trade and about 35 % of oil transported by sea .
This is only one in a series of major naval drills held by Iran in the Strait of Hormuz .
Ten days of drills , `` Velayat 90 '' , was conducted last December and `` Velayat 89 '' a year and a half before that in May 2010 .
Four months ago , the United States with some of its allies also conducted a series of exercises and naval drills , concerned with keeping the strait open .
Iran has said it might close the strait if its nuclear program were attacked .
With Democratic Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts 's nomination and likely approval as U.S. President Barack Obama 's choice to replace the retiring Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , Kerry 's Senate seat is expected soon to be vacated , making necessary a special election to choose a new Senator .
That potential race is now taking shape with two candidates having emerged as the frontrunners for their respective parties ' nominations : Republican Senator Scott Brown and Democratic Representative Ed Markey .
Massachusetts law adopted in 2004 requires a vacated seat to be filled permanently through special election held 145 to 160 days following vacation .
This law was passed purportedly to prevent then-Governor Mitt Romney , a Republican , from naming a replacement for Kerry , who was at the time , the Democratic presidential nominee .
No such election occurred until long-time Senator Ted Kennedy died in office , vacating his seat in 2009 .
At the time , Massachusetts governor Deval Patrick named Democrat Paul G. Kirk as a temporary replacement .
Kirk chose not to run for the seat , and instead the Democrats nominated Massachusetts Attorney General Martha Coakley , who lost to Brown .
Now , Patrick reportedly wishes to again name a temporary replacement who will not run in the special election .
Candidates for this position include : Victoria Reggie Kennedy , the widow of Ted Kennedy ; former governor and 1988 Democratic presidential nominee Michael Dukakis ; and the retiring Congressman Barney Frank .
Amid the Senate 's consideration of the Affordable Health Care for America Act , Brown 's 2010 election broke the Democrats ' filibuster-proof super-majority in the chamber .
As the first Massachusetts Republican elected since Edward Brooke in 1972 , Brown gained a reputation in the Senate as a political moderate , stressing bipartisanship .
After the defeat , Republican Senators Dan Coats of Indiana , John McCain of Arizona , and Olympia Snowe of Maine each asked Brown to run for Senate again .
He alluded to a potential return during his farewell address earlier in December , noting , `` As I 've said many times before , victory and defeat is temporary ... Depending on what happens , and where we go , all of us , we may obviously meet again . ''
Though former Governor William Weld is also considered a potential Republican primary candidate , Brown leads him in opinion polls by a wide margin .
Additionally , a December 17 -- 18 poll conducted by WBUR shows Brown with a 58 percent favorability rate in his state and ahead of potential Democratic nominees Markey , former Congressman Marty Meehan , and Congressmen Mike Capuano and Stephen Lynch .
Patrick , Kennedy , Coakley , and Meehan have all denied interest in the seat as have other Democrats speculated to jump in including actor Ben Affleck and attorney Edward M. Kennedy , Jr. , Ted Kennedy 's son .
Though Lynch and Capuano have expressed interest in the seat , Markey is thus far the only announced candidate .
In a statement to The Boston Globe , Markey affirmed `` this fight is too important '' not to run and `` there is so much at stake '' in the election .
He added that an official announcement would come in January .
Markey , who has served in Congress since 1976 , previously ran for the Senate seat in 1984 but withdrew before the primary ; Kerry went on to win the primary and seat that year .
Markey intends to focus his campaign on global warming , gun control , protection of Social Security and Medicare , and government spending for jobs .
According to political scientist Peter Ubertaccio of Stonehill College , that may discourage prominent Democrats thinking about entering the race .
Nevertheless , State Senator Benjamin Downing has announced he is exploring a potential bid .
Though Markey has more money than Brown 's $ 464,000 left from his 2012 campaign , Ubertaccio , in his analysis of the race , notes Brown has more recent campaign experience than Markey , who has not had a competitive campaign lately .
He sees the rush to support Markey as unusual , and as a way to discourage Democratic challengers to Markey .
Jon Keller of Boston 's CBS affiliate notes the rush was likely to allow Markey to begin attacks on Brown rather than Democrats , but he concludes the lack of choice for Democrats may give Brown an advantage as an outsider running against the insiders ' hand-picked successor .
The new rating brings greater consistency between Australia 's systems of video game ratings and film ratings .
Previously video game classification went no higher than MA15 + , so more adult video games would have to be either classed as MA15 + or denied classification .
The deal which allowed the legislation to proceed was struck after John Rau became Attorney General of South Australia .
A photographer has died after being run over by a car in Los Angeles , California , United States .
The man , who was attempting to photograph the vehicle of Canadian pop singer Justin Bieber , has not been formally identified by police but was named as Chris Guerra by local media .
At approximately 17:45 PST Tuesday the driver of Bieber 's white Ferrari car was pulled over by police for a speeding offence on Interstate 405 , near to Getty Center Drive .
Reports indicate Guerra -- a freelance photojournalist -- had been pursuing this vehicle throughout the day , based on the incorrect assumption that Bieber was in the vehicle when it was actually rapper Lil Twist driving the car with another passenger onboard .
Entertainment news website TMZ understands the photographer stopped his vehicle on the other side of Sepulveda Boulevard and attempted to take pictures of the police stop before crossing the road and continuing , prompting the California Highway Patrol police officer conducting the traffic stop to order him back across , twice .
The photographer was transported to Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center , where he subsequently died .
In a statement , Bieber said '' -LSB- w -RSB- hile I was not present nor directly involved with this tragic accident , my thoughts and prayers are with the family of the victim . ''
According to police , the driver of the vehicle that hit the photographer is unlikely to face criminal charges .
The incident has prompted Bieber to call for changes to laws surrounding the way in which members of the press work .
`` Hopefully this tragedy will finally inspire meaningful legislation and whatever other necessary steps to protect the lives and safety of celebrities , police officers , innocent public bystanders , and the photographers themselves '' , he said .
Following Sorenson 's release , he will also be supervised for five years .
British comedian and TV presenter Jim Davidson was arrested yesterday as part of Operation Yewtree , the sex abuse investigation started following accusations against deceased entertainer Jimmy Savile .
Police said the arrest of Davidson was not directly connected to the accusations against Savile .
Davidson has been released on bail until March .
Henri Brandman , Davidson 's solicitor , said the complaints against Davidson stem from two women who were adults when the abuse was alleged to have occurred .
As a result of the arrest , Davidson has pulled out of appearing in Celebrity Big Brother .
The host of the show , Brian Dowling , stated before the arrest that if Davidson were to appear on the show , he would treat him with `` the same respect as I 'd give any of the housemates '' despite Davidson previously calling the openly gay Dowling a `` shirt lifter '' and a `` fucking disgrace '' on an episode of Hell 's Kitchen .
Opposition activists in Syria say nine or more people have died as the result of a car bomb explosion at a fuel station in the Barzeh al-Balad district of Damascus , the capital of the country , according to BBC News Online .
News agency Reuters has placed the minimum death toll at eleven while also reporting at least forty injuries .
At the time of the incident , a large number of people were waiting at the station to collect petrol .
Activists say Syria is short of petrol because of the ongoing civil war , which started during 2011 .
BBC News Online says drivers queueing at fuel stations for hours is a frequent occurrence in the country .
An unidentified activist told Reuters the fuel station was `` usually packed even when it has no fuel .
There are lots of people who sleep there overnight , waiting for early morning fuel consignments '' .
The same person reported witnessing the bodies of burned people being placed onto ambulances , as well as those with wounds and severe burns , and vehicles the blast had destroyed being towed away .
The activist , a local resident , said security workers at the station then told him to leave the scene .
It is unclear at this stage as to who was responsible for the incident , although the local activist who spoke to Reuters said there had been increased conflict between civilians and militia supportive of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad at fuel stations recently .
The United States Congress , consisting of the House of Representatives and Senate , convened at 12:00 PM EST Thursday at the United States Capitol in Washington , D.C. for the first session of the 113th United States Congress .
Newly elected and re-elected members of both the House of Representatives and Senate were sworn-in as both houses debated the rules and procedures to be adhered to for the next two years .
The House of Representatives customarily elected its Speaker for the 113th Congress .
Incumbent Speaker Republican John Boehner was re-elected , defeating Democrat Nancy Pelosi by a vote of 220 -- 192 .
Boehner 's re-election as House Speaker ended speculation that the Republican Party would split and nominate another candidate to challenge him for the gavel following internal tumult during the `` fiscal cliff '' negotiations last month .
After Boehner was sworn-in for his second term as Speaker , he proceeded to swear-in all 435 elected and re-elected members of the House en masse .
Among the membership of the U.S. Senate for the 113th Congress are a record-setting 20 female Senators , including newly-elected Democrat Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin , the first openly gay member of the U.S. Senate .
Republican Mark Kirk , United States Senator from Illinois , also officially returned to his duties after suffering a debilitating stroke last January 21st that forced him to learn how to walk again .
Fulfilling a goal he had set for himself after his stroke , Kirk ascended the 45 steps leading up to the Senate wing of the United States Capitol building with assistance from both Joe Biden and fellow Senator Joe Manchin , as several other members of both houses of Congress and well-wishers looked on .
A new congress convenes every two years in January , with the next congress slated to convene in January 2015 .
The 1st United States Congress convened in 1789 .
The Church of England are planning to allow gay men who are celibate and in a civil partnership to become bishops according to an announcement made by the House of Bishops .
This expands a previous decision made in 2005 allowing gay clergy with civil partners .
Whether gay clergyman would be allowed to become bishops became an issue in 2003 with the appointment of Rev Jeffrey John as Bishop of Reading .
Jeffrey John was forced to step down from his position and now serves as Dean of St Albans Cathedral .
Anglican evangelicals have suggested such a change ought to have been passed by the General Synod rather than the House of Bishops .
Chris Sugden from Anglican Mainstream said the change coming from the House of Bishops `` looks too much like salami-slicing away at the Church 's teaching '' .
Wambach became the first woman from the United States to win the award since Mia Hamm in 2002 .
Her victory came in the same year she aided her team in winning a gold medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics and where she personally contributed five goals in her team 's effort .
The books contain each city 's plans for the Games as they relate to key hosting aspects such as venues , budgets , financial guarantees , security , accommodations , and transportation .
These are scheduled to be made public today .
The host city is to be named on September 7 at the 125th IOC Session in Buenos Aires , where a new IOC President is also to be chosen .
All the bids are being viewed against a backdrop of the global economic downturn , with hosting costs and the national economy possibly playing a role in voter decision-making .
This would keep infrastructure costs down and make the Games more affordable for Spain .
London 's recent hosting of the Games is seen as potentially harmful to their bid because two Games in Europe within only a few Olympic cycles runs counter to traditional Games hosting .
The IOC 's Evaluation Commission is scheduled to visit each city in March , with their first scheduled visit starting March 4 in Tokyo , then starting March 18 in Madrid and wrapping up their city visits starting March 24 in Istanbul .
Following their visits , the Commission is to write and submit a report to IOC membership by July 4 to assist voters in making their decision .
Baku in Azerbaijan and Doha in Qatar took part in the first stage of the bid process but were eliminated from contention in May at a meeting of the IOC 's Executive Board in Quebec City , Canada .
Rome had considered a bid but withdrew early in the process because of Italian economic concerns .
An IOC report said Istanbul 's bid `` offers good potential '' while Madrid had `` a strong application '' and Tokyo had `` a very strong application . ''
Bookmakers have given Tokyo best odds to receive the Games at 4/6 compared to 5/2 for Istanbul and 3/1 for Madrid .
Tokyo last hosted the Olympics in 1964 and had previously won the rights to host the later canceled 1940 Summer Olympics .
Bid organizers believe the Games would be an uplifting force for a country still recovering from a natural disaster in 2011 .
Takeda is quoted by Inside the Games saying of the bid , `` With tremendous support from people in Tokyo and across Japan , we have celebrated a memorable milestone today with the submission of our Candidature file , -LSB- ... -RSB- Based on lessons from our bid for the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games , we have retained the best of that bid plan while adding important new strengths .
Now that our Candidature file is complete , Tokyo is one step closer to implementing an innovative and inspiring Games plan .
The Games in 2020 in Tokyo will offer athletes , spectators and Olympic and Paralympic family members a true once-in-a-lifetime experience . ''
Takeda remarked , `` Many of our venues are in place ; most of the games infrastructure is in place and the $ 4.5 billion budget to complete these tasks is already in the bank . ''
Despite Tokyo 's positive early response from the IOC , there is no guarantee the city will be selected as previous early favourites have failed to win hosting rights when it came down to the final vote .
Amongst possible concerns , their bid could be undermined by South Korea 's hosting of the 2018 Winter Olympics .
Istanbul are bidding for the fifth time , with this bid viewed as their most competitive and serious one to date .
Their bid was presented by the city 's mayor , Kadir Topbaş , the bid leader Hasan Arat , President of the National Olympic Committee of Turkey and president of the World Archery Federation Uğur Erdener , Deputy Undersecretary of the Minister of Youth and Sports Yavuz Çelik , and general director of sports for Istanbul 2020 Mehmet Baykan .
Their bid calls for the largest Opening Ceremonies in Olympic Games history , with a ceremony on the European and Asian banks of the Bosphorus involving a half million people .
Istanbul 's bid calls for events to be held on two continents , which the bid organizers believe gives them an advantage of Madrid and Japan , as this fits within the framework of the Olympic ideal .
That they have not hosted the Games previously is another potential positive as the most recent successful bids for the Olympic and Paralympic Games were in cities that had never hosted them before .
Turkey 's bid is bolstered by having successfully hosted the IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics and the FINA World Short Course Swimming Championships last year .
The strength of the Turkish economy is also seen as a positive with their bid going forward .
Their bid is hurt by ongoing disputes with Syria that has resulted in 150,000 Syrian refugees living on the Turkish side of the border .
Arat is quoted by Inside the Games on the bid saying , `` This milestone is the latest step in our 20-year journey to win the honour of hosting the Games , -LSB- ... -RSB- For the very first time , our desire to host the Games is matched by our capacity .
Istanbul 2020 has a technically outstanding master plan and delivery structure , and we would grab the world 's attention with a breathtaking setting and a series of groundbreaking firsts , such as being the first ever Games held in two continents simultaneously .
Istabul 's mayor Topbaş arrived at the last minute to assist in the bid submission despite bad winter weather in Istanbul .
Quoted by Inside the Games , he said of the city 's bid , `` Today is a historic moment for Istanbul and the Turkish nation , -LSB- ... -RSB- Istanbul 2020 is the first sports bid in Turkish history to have been officially launched by the Prime Minister , and it has been identified as a strategic national priority .
-LSB- ... -RSB- The Games would enhance Istanbul 's growing global status as a place to visit , do business and , increasingly , stage world-class sport , -LSB- ... -RSB- We are all aligned behind our shared vision : hosting the Games for the first time would be the defining achievement in nearly 100 years of the Republic of Turkey . ''
Madrid 's bid comes at a time when the Spanish economy is in the middle of a second recession where unemployment hovers around 25 per cent and on the heels of two previous failed bids .
Bid organizers believe the Games could serve as an economic driver for the country .
Madrid 's mayor is quoted by Inside the Games on the bid as `` a project the whole country is behind and a dream for all Spaniards -LSB- ... -RSB- The proof can be seen in the fact that three levels of Government are represented here -- the city , the regional and the national .
We are here to give our support to the countless people who are working for and believe in Madrid 's Olympic aspirations . ''
Rain fell continuously along a large swathe of the eastern part of Texas on Tuesday and Wednesday , and is predicted to continue through much of today , according to media sources .
Experts predict 3 -- 5 inches of rain will fall in the area .
The city of Tyler received just under 35 inches of rainfall in 2012 , about 11 inches less than usual for a one-year period .
A meteorologist with the National Weather Service noted the rainfall is a positive sign for 2013 considering the state 's limited rain over the past three years .
In July 2011 , the state saw less than 1 inch of rainfall for the entire month .
In 2010 -- 11 , the state saw the worst drought year in an over 100-year recorded period .
Many farmers and ranchers experienced devastating losses of livestock and crops .
Significant drought conditions returned again during Summer 2012 .
Physicians and others are struggling to address a growing outbreak of influenza affecting a large portion of the United States .
Earlier this week , the Mayor of Boston declared a `` flu emergency '' for the city , as 700 cases of the virus were reported .
Public officials in Texas have urged citizens to receive a flu shot .
The state 's public health Commissioner said in a press release , `` The best thing people can do to protect themselves is to get a dose of flu vaccine now . ''
Doctors are telling citizens to wash their hands , get a flu shot and avoid sick people if possible to lessen chances of catching the virus .
However , a report released on Friday noted that 7.3 % of deaths last week were a result of pneumonia and the flu .
A total of 20 children in the United States have died during this flu season from flu-related illnesses .
The Centers for Disease Control reports nine out of 10 regions in the United States had `` elevated '' flu activity .
These data indicate that seasonal flu has spread and reached high levels several weeks before the usual time of late January or February .
New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo declared a state-wide public health emergency on Saturday .
He also issued an executive order which allows pharmacists to administer flu vaccinations to patients between six months and 18 years of age .
Despite earlier cooler weather , heatwave conditions are expected to resume in New South Wales , Australia .
Local weather service forecasts expect temperatures to rise above 40 ° C -LRB- 104 ° F -RRB- , as-experienced earlier in the week .
The percentage of uncontained fires jumped as high as 20 % .
On Friday , local fire authorities have declared total fire bans across Victoria , New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory .
Fire crews at the east coast of Australia are readying to battle an increased rate of bushfires during the weekend .
Extremely hot weather and strong winds played havoc with the fires early in the week .
A minor change in the weather assisted crews on Thursday but the high temperatures are set to return on Friday and through the weekend .
That 's an awful lot of fireline for firefighters to monitor and obviously that 's going to be troubling over today and particularly tomorrow when it will be even hotter . ''
On Monday , an electrical fire broke out aboard a Japan Airlines 787 at Boston 's Logan International Airport , when a battery pack which powers the auxiliary power unit , for when the plane is on the ground , caught fire .
The fire was discovered by maintenance workers after passengers and crew disembarked following their flight from Tokyo 's Narita Airport .
The next day , a separate Japan Airlines 787 , also at Logan International Airport , heading to Tokyo , suffered a fuel leak that spilled around 40 gallons , which was spotted by the crew of the aircraft taxiing behind them .
`` That Japan Air may know it , but they 've got fuel or something spilling out the outboard left wing .
Quite a bit , '' said the pilot of aircraft behind them on local air traffic control frequencies .
Earlier Friday , two All Nippon Airways suffered separate incidents in Japan .
An oil leak was noticed in the engine after one aircraft had landed in Miyazaki , coming from Tokyo 's Haneda Airport .
Another flight , flying between Haneda Airport and Matsuyama said the pilot 's side window in the cockpit suffered a crack .
The FAA in a statement said `` In light of a series of recent events , the FAA will conduct a comprehensive review of the Boeing 787 critical systems , including the design , manufacture and assembly . ''
Further adding , `` The purpose of the review is to validate the work conducted during the certification process and further ensure that the aircraft meets the FAA 's high level of safety . ''
According to the statement , `` The review will also examine how the electrical and mechanical systems interact with each other . ''
The Boeing 787 relies more on electrical , as opposed to mechanical , systems than past aircraft from the manufacturer including having electronics operate hydraulic pumps and using electric brakes .
But we need to have a complete understanding of what is happening , '' said newly sworn-in FAA Administrator Michael P. Huerta .
`` We are conducting the review to further ensure that the aircraft meets our high safety standards . ''
Boeing released a statement saying , '' -LSB- The company -RSB- is confident in the design and performance of the 787 .
The airplane has logged 50,000 hours of flight and there are more than 150 flights occurring daily . ''
Real Madrid lost the first leg of the round at an away match against Celta Vigo 1 -- 2 and needed to win this game by a score of 1 -- 0 to advance .
Their 4 -- 0 victory gave them an aggregate score of 5 -- 2 which allowed them to advance in Copa del Rey .
They were led in scoring by Portuguese star Cristiano Ronaldo who scored a hat trick , with goals in the second , twenty-fourth , and eighty-seventh minutes .
Ronaldo had been a heavy favourite to win FIFA 's Ballon d'Or earlier in the week but was beaten by fellow La Liga rival Lionel Messi , who Real Madrid fans booed during the game .
Ronaldo would have scored a fourth goal but the one he scored in the thirty-seventh minute was made while he was in a position controversially ruled offside .
Sami Khedira scored Real Madrid 's fourth and final goal in the eighty-ninth minute .
All 187 store locations of Jessops camera retailer are closing in the United Kingdom today .
The business , which went into administration earlier this week , is to leave its workforce of approximately 1370 jobless .
While staff at the business ' top office in Leicester , in central England , are not being made redundant with immediate effect , they are in the next few weeks to lose their positions .
Hunt said PwC `` will continue to ensure that employees are paid as they assist us during the closure '' at Jessops .
In a comment to the BBC , Hunt described the situation at Jessops as `` a horrible end to a very intensive couple of days '' .
A helicopter hit a crane on the top of a high-rise building , St George Wharf Tower , in Vauxhall , Central London today , killing the pilot , Pete Barnes , and another person not in the helicopter .
At least nine people were injured and at least five of them were delivered to hospital .
The incident occurred during the morning rush hour , in heavy fog .
Full investigation may take up to several months , but authorities already have said the incident does not suggest terrorism .
A group of researchers published a paper about their discovery of a new species of Madagascar mermaid skink lizards last December .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- What were the roles of the people involved in the research ?
Additionally , all of them have corrected the article , and gave me many relevant advices and corrections , thus improving the quality and the reliability of the paper .
In zoology , it is only needed to publish the description of a new species -LRB- and to give it a name -RRB- in a scientific journal , and to designate a holotype specimen -LRB- = specimen that will be the official reference for this species -RRB- , to get this new species `` officially '' recognised by the scientific community .
That does not mean that this new species is `` correct '' -LRB- it might be invalidated by subsequent counter-studies -RRB- , but that means that this discovery and the new name of -LSB- the -RSB- species are officially existing .
But other studies -LRB- including molecular studies -RRB- are currently in progress , in order to focus on the phylogenetic position and the evolution of this species .
The species was collected at Marosely , Boriziny -LRB- French : Port-Bergé -RRB- , Sofia Region , Madagascar .
Aurélien Miralles : Well , I would say that since I am a child I am fascinated by the biodiversity of tropical countries , and more especially by reptiles .
Professor Vences proposed me to associate our complementary fields of expertise : he is expert in herpetology for Madagascar , and I am expert in skinks lizards -LRB- family Scincidae -RRB- .
It was a very fruitful experience , and many other results have still to -LSB- be -RSB- published .
In that place , I found an old jar of ethanol with two weird little specimens previously collected by a student who did n't realize it was something new .
`` Sireno '' means mermaid .
`` Scincus '' means skinks , a group of little lizards on which I am particularly focusing my studies .
AM : Hard to answer this question because nothing is known on the ecology of this species .
It is a big device producing -LSB- a -RSB- 3D picture of the internal structure without damaging the specimen .
It is actually very similar to the scanner used in human medicine , but this one is specially designed for small specimens .
Otherwise , I am currently studying the DNA of this species and closely related species in order to determine its phylogenetic position compared to other species with legs , in order to learn more about the evolutionary phenomena leading to limb loss .
Is it a photo as seen in a CT-scan ?
AM : No , this picture showing a whitish specimen on a black background is not a CT-scan .
It is a normal photograph of the collection specimen preserved in alcohol -LRB- the one that was in the jar -RRB- .
You can see the complete of picture -LRB- including CT-scan 3D radiography , drawing ... -RRB- in the original scientific publication .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Do you know when the newly discovered mermaid skink species was put into the jar ?
According to Philippine Foreign Affairs Secretary Albert del Rosario , Manila chose this move after exhausting `` almost all political and diplomatic avenues . ''
The Philippines and China are involved in a variety of disputes in the South China Sea along with Taiwan and ASEAN members Brunei , Malaysia , and Vietnam .
The current chair of ASEAN , Brunei , has stated it seeks a legally-binding `` code of conduct '' for the disputes .
A British woman has been sentenced to death in Indonesia for drug smuggling .
Lindsay Sandiford , 56 , was found guilty of breaking the tough drug laws in place in Indonesia at the Denpasar district court yesterday , having being found with 10.6 lb of cocaine , worth about # 1.6 m , in the lining of her suitcase at Bali 's main airport in May last year .
Lawyers for Ms Sandiford , who is originally from the town of Redcar in Teesside , England , said the ruling `` surprised '' them , and they would appeal .
U.K. Foreign Office Minister Hugo Swire expressed his strong objection to the decision and said the U.K. opposed the use of the death penalty .
`` We are aware that Lindsay Sandiford is facing the death penalty in Indonesia .
We strongly object to the death penalty and continue to provide consular assistance to Lindsay and her family during this difficult time , '' he said .
Ms Sandiford was stopped on May 19 during a routine customs check at Ngurah Rai airport in Bali , after arriving from Bangkok via Thai Airways .
The court is expected to deliver a verdict in the trial of Julian Ponder today .
Mr Ponder is accused of receiving the drugs from Ms Sandiford in Bali .
The move would open up as many as 230,000 jobs in the US military to women , who have already served in non frontline-combat work in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan .
Over 20,000 women have served in Iraq and Afghanistan , about 130 killed in service there , and over 800 wounded .
A Foreign Office spokesman said `` We are now aware of a specific and imminent threat to Westerners in Benghazi , and urge any British nationals who remain there against our advice to leave immediately '' .
The statement indicated that the threat was to Westerners and did n't provide details about specific threats .
The Foreign Minister Nasser Judeh called for urgent international support to help deal with large amounts of Syrian refugees .
The request for foreign aid comes amid alerts from international aid organisations to prepare for a humanitarian crisis and strained resources .
It is still not enough , given the numbers that are coming in . ''
The auction for the mobile spectrum capable of carrying 4G mobile broadband services in the United Kingdom got underway on Thursday .
The auction process is expected to take several weeks and will take place online .
Mobile network operators are expected to roll out services by July .
4G mobile network technology will bring faster downstream speeds than the current 3G connections allowing for data-intensive surfing on the move such as video streaming .
Some mobile users have criticised the industry regulator Ofcom for having taken a long time to start rolling out the 4G technology , with the United Kingdom falling behind many other European countries .
EE -LRB- Everything Everywhere -RRB- launched the UK 's first 4G network in a number of cities last year , however many people complained due to them being the only service provider .
The bidders include the current main UK mobile network operators -- Vodafone UK , Telefónica UK -LRB- O2 -RRB- , Everything Everywhere and Hutchinson 3G -LRB- 3 -RRB- -- as well as British Telecommunications .
This will change the way we consume digital media in both our personal and working lives and deliver significant benefits to millions of consumers and businesses across the country . ''
The United Kingdom economy shrank by 0.3 % in the fourth quarter of 2012 according to figures released today by the Office for National Statistics , increasing the likelihood of a triple-dip recession .
This comes after the 0.9 % growth seen in the preceding quarter which is believed to have been due to the Olympic Games .
The Office for National Statistics has said economic output remained flat throughout 2012 .
Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne said , `` We can either run away from those problems or we can confront them .
And I 'm determined to confront them so we can go on creating jobs for the people of this country '' .
The British government formally published legislation today to allow marriage for same-sex couples .
MPs would be able to vote on the legislation at the second reading in Parliament on February 5 .
Gay and lesbian couples have been allowed since 2005 to form civil partnerships .
The Coalition for Equal Marriage , a campaign group supporting the legalisation of same-sex marriage , have tracked support by individual MPs and claim 336 MPs are likely to vote in favour of the legislation , while 130 are likely to vote against .
Conservative MPs are to be given a free vote , but both Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs are broadly in support .
As part of the legislation , the government have included a set of provisions they describe as a `` quadruple lock '' against churches and other religious denominations being forced to perform same-sex weddings , including an explicit ban on the Church of England and the Church of Wales doing so .
The `` quadruple lock '' consists of an explicit statement in the Bill `` that no religious organisation , or individual minister , can be forced to marry same-sex couples or to permit that to happen on their premises '' , an amendment to the Equality Act 2010 to prevent claims of discrimination against religious organisations for not performing same-sex weddings , an opt-in for religious groups who do wish to perform same-sex marriages , and the explicit ban for the Churches of England and Wales .
Maria Miller said the government recognises `` that some churches wo n't want to participate in same-sex marriages .
We are trying to make sure that there are the protections there for churches who feel that this is n't appropriate for their particular beliefs .
We know that there are churches who do want to take part in same-sex marriages , so we have made sure that there are provisions there so they can . ''
Former defence secretary Liam Fox , opposing the legislation , has suggested the European Court of Human Rights will overrule the government 's protections for churches .
He argued earlier this month : `` Any assurances that we are given that distinguishing between churches will not be used at some point by European courts to drive a coach and horses through the legislation carries little credibility with those of us who have watched similar assurances trounced in the past . ''
The Roman Catholic Church has strongly opposed the measures .
Archbishop Vincent Nichols has said he is `` very disappointed '' the government is pushing for same-sex marriage and claimed it would `` weaken '' the institution .
The Archbishop also claimed of the legislation : '' -LSB- t -RSB- here was no announcement in any party manifesto '' .
However , the Conservative Party 's `` contract for equalities '' for the 2010 election included a statement saying they would `` consider '' same-sex marriage : `` We will also consider the case for changing the law to allow civil partnerships to be called and classified as marriage . ''
Wednesday , an over-90-year-old Manns Mitre 10 hardware store , run by Alex P Mann Pty Ltd , closed until further notice after a rent dispute in Port Adelaide , South Australia .
The rent dispute involved $ 315,060.70 of rent for months of September 2012 to January 2013 unpaid to the landlord , Fourteen Sails Pty Ltd. .
The store had to fire about 40 -- 50 employees without a warning in advance .
The store administrator , Tim Clifton , said they had to ring the workers out of the blue : `` I was advised the landlord had distrained for unpaid rent over the business and that left the directors in the position where the business was untenable .
I presume at this stage trading was poor and the company just did n't have the money to pay the rent .
We 'll do our best to get them their entitlements under the government schemes , and we calculate what they 're owed in the next few days and hopefully get that underway for them .
On Saturday , Wikinews took photos of the documents available at the store entrance .
The rent dispute details and an inventory were available for everyone to read .
During the ten minutes of taking photos , around seven people visited the closed entrance and read the documents a first time .
One of them commented , `` oh hey , Bunnings will be stronger '' .
Port Adelaide Mayor Gary Johanson said the loss of the store is a significant loss as Port Adelaide is being redeveloped : `` Their staff were extremely good , the service levels were high , the store was always well stocked and it was a great example of a family business .
The landlord is acting within their rights .
This is a franchise of a bigger company but it is a family franchise and it employs a lot of staff .
On Monday at 19:00 local time -LRB- 1800 UTC -RRB- , Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands held a speech on radio and television , announcing she will abdicate the throne on April 30 .
Prince Willem-Alexander is to become King of the Netherlands .
Prior to the Queen 's announcement , local media suggested she would abdicate .
Following the Queen 's address , Dutch prime minister Mark Rutte 's response was broadcast .
She also stated the `` time has come for a new generation to take responsibility . ''
The Queen expressed her gratitude toward the people of the Dutch Kingdom for their ongoing support during her reign .
The United States economy shrank by 0.1 % in the last three months of 2012 according to official statistics released on Wednesday by the United States Department of Commerce .
The contraction in the economy comes after growth of 3.1 % in the previous quarter -LRB- July to September -RRB- and is the first contraction since the 2009 recession .
However , there were increases in consumer spending and investments which shows that there may be other problems with the economy and that the `` fiscal cliff '' issues of December did not worry markets too much .
In Mississippi , at least ten counties suffered power outages , and the National Weather Service reported a tornado struck areas near the town of Sardis .
At least 11,900 customers were without power in Indiana , where debris blocked roadways and a tornado reportedly damaged homes in the town of Solsberry .
In Tennessee major damage was reported around the Nashville area with widespread tree and some building damage reported .
One man was killed in Nashville when a tree fell on a building he was using as shelter , according to police .
An EF2 tornado was also confirmed to have touched down in the town of Mount Juliet .
Damage was also reported in Georgia , where a tornado caused extensive damage in Adairsville , and one person was reported killed .
Damage and flipped vehicles resulted in the closure of Interstate 75 at Adairsville .
The Storm Prediction Center and National Climatic Data Center said the fatality in Adairsville was the first tornado-related fatality in the United States in 220 days , since a deadly tornado in Florida June 24 , ending the longest recorded time between tornado fatalities in the United States .
A main belt asteroid , No. 274301 , has been named after Wikipedia , a free encyclopedia .
The information became available on the Minor Planet Center 's website yesterday .
The decision of the Committee for Small Body Nomenclature to assign the name `` Wikipedia '' to the asteroid was published in the Minor Planet Circular of January 27 , published online yesterday , page 82403 .
Wikimedia Ukraine board member Andriy Makukha proposed the name .
The asteroid 274301 Wikipedia was discovered by the team of astronomers of Andrushivka Astronomical Observatory .
Accurate calculation of its orbit showed asteroid 2008 QH24 is the same as 1997 RO4 and 2007 FK34 .
The asteroid had been previously spotted by observatories including Caussols-ODAS in France , and Mt. Lemmon Survey and Steward Observatory in Arizona , US .
Residents of Santa Clara County , California expressed their opposition at a public hearing Thursday January 31 to a local detainment provision of the Secure Communities program of US Immigration and Customs Enforcement -LRB- ICE -RRB- .
Secure Communities includes a provision that ICE can ask state and local detention facilities to hold anyone arrested who might be in the US without adequate documentation until ICE has time to review their case .
The comments came in a public hearing of a policy working group of the Public Safety and Justice Committee , convened to discuss a November 7 recommendation by District Attorney Jeff Rosen to honor ICE detainer requests for serious and violent offenders .
Since October 18 , 2011 , Santa Clara County has refused ICE requests to detain individuals who would otherwise be released .
The January 31 hearing began with comments by approximately 25 of the audience of roughly 35 -- 40 , all of which opposed the DA 's proposal .
They said public safety was enhanced under the current policy because many in the immigrant community have less reason to fear that they or people they care about would be deported if the police were called .
Sheriff Laurie Smith then described an individual who is now in prison with a rape conviction for an event that would have been prevented if the detention request from ICE had been honored .
Several in the audience replied by asking how many other criminals would go free because people refused to report or testify as a result of increased fear of deportation .
Comments supporting the current policy have been made by people who did not attend .
The San Jose Mercury News for January 31 includes an op ed by Supervisor Dave Cortese , acting Public Defender Molly O'Neal , and Director of the Domestic Violence Advocacy Consortium Cynthia Hunter .
They wrote , `` There is nothing more valuable to public safety than community trust in local law enforcement because it establishes residents ' willingness to report crimes and cooperate with police .
But that trust will break down immeasurably in immigrant communities if residents face the debilitating fear of deportation .
This is especially true in Santa Clara County , where two-thirds of residents live in immigrant households . ''
The policy adopted October 18 , 2011 stated Santa Clara County would honor ICE detention requests `` for individuals who have been convicted of a serious or violent felony , '' provided ICE agreed in writing to reimburse the county for the additional expense .
DA Rosen 's November 7 presentation claimed honoring ICE holds would `` produce an undetermined amount of cost savings by reducing probation costs '' , as individuals otherwise on probation would be transferred to federal detention .
Reports from Colorado and Los Angeles have claimed that ICE holds averaged over 20 days .
ICE claims an official limit of at most two days .
Los Angeles is currently being sued over questionable detentions of a number of individuals including a British filmmaker named Duncan Roy , who was held for 89 days .
After DA Rosen 's presentation on November 7 , the Santa Clara County Public Safety and Justice Committee referred this issue to its policy review working group , which held various private meetings , failed to reach a consensus , and then organized the public meeting of January 31 .
The next official action on this issue is currently scheduled for the March 7 meeting of the Public Safety and Justice Committee .
David Cameron pledged that Britain would help in training Libya 's security forces .
He said in a joint press conference held with Libyan Prime Minister Ali Zeidan that `` the British people want to stand with you and help you deliver the greater security that Libya needs '' .
Cameron also reiterated his support for the French-backed intervention in Mali , denying suggestions put to him that foreign intervention in Islamic countries would lead to a backlash against Western nations by al-Qaeda .
The security was tight during his walkabout in the Martyrs ' Square , where police attempted to hold back the locals as a police helicopter flew overhead .
His visit to Tripoli comes in the aftermath of recent threats to the British embassy and just a week after British citizens were urged to leave the second largest city of Benghazi due to a `` specific and imminent '' threat to Westerners .
Police officers investigating the 1988 Lockerbie bombing from the Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary have been granted access to new information to help them with their inquiries .
In 2001 , Abdelbaset al-Megrahi was convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment but was released in 2009 on compassionate health grounds and died last year .
An unidentified assailant shot at politician and Armenian presidential candidate Paruyr Hayrikyan and wounded him on Thursday just before midnight on a street in Yerevan , the capital city of Armenia .
Hayrikyan was transported to hospital and his state is stable .
The deputy chairman of the parliament Eduard Sharmazanov also said the act was a `` provocation against democratic , free and transparent elections '' .
A parliament speaker Hovik Abrahamyan admitted the election can be postponed .
Following a press-conference on Friday , REGNUM News Agency reported that analyst Sergei Shakariants said the attackers could have wanted to delay the elections .
He said that Paruyr Hayrikyan was not expected to win , and merely removing him from the race would not change the essence of the elections ; elections were the real target .
Sergei Shakariants also said the attackers may want to move the elections closer to March 1 to remind the public of previous troubles on this day in 2008 when the current president , Serzh Sargsyan , was elected .
Former dissident Hayrikyan leads the National Self-determination Union , which opposes ruling president Serzh Sargsyan .
Sarkisian is expected to win the elections .
Together eight candidates run for election .
Hayrikyan , 63 , was held in prison for years under the Soviet regime and later left the country for exile , but he returned to Armenia in the 1990s .
In 1999 , eight politicians and officers , including prime minister Vazgen Sargsyan and parliament speaker Karen Demirchyan , were assassinated inside the parliament hall .
Last Saturday in Mt. Pleasant , South Carolina , Assistant U.S. Attorney Alston Badger died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
According to the Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention , guns are used in 85 % of male suicides in the state .
Debate has continued this week in the state about gun control as it relates to suicide .
Iran 's PressTV published an opinion piece claiming that for every gun owner who uses their weapon in their home for self-defense , there are eleven suicide attempts involving a weapon .
In the United States , veterans are more likely to use guns in acts of suicide than acts of homicide .
Guns are often used in suicide attempts , with PolitiFact reporting on Wednesday that there were 4,643 non-fatal gun involved suicide attempts in 2010 .
This number contradicts testimony by Wayne LaPierre of NRA to the United States Congress regarding unintentional deaths cause by firearms as LaPierre cited 600 deaths .
Australia instituted tougher gun control regulations in 1996 , including gun buy back programs .
According to a study by Andrew Leigh of Australian National University and Christine Neill of Wilfrid Laurier University , these programs correlate to an 80 % drop in suicides involving guns at a time when other methods of suicide remained consistent .
A 1991 study published in the New England Journal of Medicine found stricter gun control in the District of Columbia was a likely cause of a reduction in the number of suicides by gun shot in D.C. compared to surrounding areas .
Another suicide occurred Monday in New Jersey .
Chester and Rosaria Andraka died after Chester allegedly shot Rosaria before killing himself .
Another murder-suicide shooting took place on Monday .
This one occurred in Elmont , New York , where 58-year-old Audley Dennis is believed to have shot his 46-year-old wife , Karen Rodgers-Dennis , before he shot himself .
The couple allegedly had a history of fighting , with a family friend telling the New York Post , `` They had their altercations .
In Greensburg , Indiana on Tuesday , local police Lieutenant Larry G. Dance committed suicide , dying from a self-inflicted gunshot .
He had joined the police force on January 1 , 1995 .
On Tuesday in Waldorf , Maryland , local police reported an attempted murder-suicide with sixty-four year old Linda Lindsey believed to have shot her husband before fatally shooting herself .
Her husband was reported to have survived and be in critical condition .
On Wednesday , three people died in a murder-suicide in Oxnard , California that involved at least one gun .
The deceased included two women and the suspected male shooter .
Also on Thursday , the body of a suspected gunman accused of killing a call center CEO and injuring a lawyer was found dead of a suspected self-inflicted gunshot wound in Mesa , Arizona .
Police had been searching for the man since Wednesday following the shooting at a mediation session over a lawsuit .
In Radcliff , Kentucky on Thursday , alleged burglar Michael Strand exchanged gunfire with police after they attempted to bring him in for questioning .
Following a lull of approximately an hour , police entered the apartment and found the man dead from an alleged self-inflicted gunshot wound .
In Medina , Ohio on Thursday , United States Marine Andrew Baumgartner , who served in Afghanistan and had been discharged several months ago , got into an altercation with Sgt. Scott Schmoll after Schmoll felt a gun on Baumgartner 's person .
Following this , Baumgartner hid in nearby woodlands , emerged to knock on the door of a local home to tell the resident he had been hit by a car , only to disappear into the woods again .
Police discovered his body alongside items they believed he had stolen .
The problem of suicide by self-inflicted gunshot wound is recognized by some gun groups .
The Royal Oak shooting range in Michigan stopped renting guns this week following after twelve people having attempted to kill themselves with guns rented from the range since 2001 -LRB- five of them were successful -RRB- .
A small crowd of about 700 was on hand to watch the Capitals play .
The Capitals had only won one of their last twelve games -- though Canberra and Townsville have been the only teams to defeat Bendigo Spirit , the top side in the competition .
The normally upbeat program guide advised that `` a Capitals win tonight is not out of the question '' .
Following a controversial decision involving Ardossi for which the umpire was loudly booed , the Fire fought back to 66 -- 62 , but Hunt and Ardossi each scored to hold them at bay .
There then followed a few minutes of farce as the game was halted due to a problem with the shot clock .
Once this was fixed , played resumed , with Ardossi and Hunt competing for the highest score .
The scoreboard read 76 -- 68 at the final siren , leaving the Capitals with a hard-earned if unexpected win .
The highest scorer was Hunt , with 21 points , closely followed by Ardossi with 20 , Cosier with 10 , and Wilson with 9 .
Bibby was left scoreless .
Nicole Hunt , Jessica Bibby , Brigitte Ardossi , Michelle Cosier and Carly Wilson formed the starting line up .
Ardossi returned after not playing last week due to a concussion .
Mikaela Dombkins , who also did not play last week , was missing entirely this week , but Lauren Jackson was still on hand , mainly to sign autographs .
Ardossi took a hard knock in the first minutes of the game .
Several minutes passed without either side scoring .
Wilson attempted , but missed , a three pointer , and Bibby had a shot that hit the ring .
After a series of turnovers , the Fire put the first score on the board .
Canberra 's response came from Norwood , who drew a foul and scored a point from a free throw .
The score went to 3 -- 4 after Hunt scored a basket .
Bibby made a second attempt at a long shot , which missed , but Wilson scored .
A few minutes later , Bibby tried another three point shot and again failed , but on the next play assisted Ardossi in tying the score at 9 -- 9 .
The five starters took to the court again in the second quarter .
The Fire scored first .
Ardossi attempted a long shot , which failed , but a turnover saw Cosier score , assisted by Hunt .
A penalty gave the Capitals possession again soon after , and Alexandra Bunton scored with one second left on the shot clock .
Wilson , substituting for Hunt as point guard , ran over the line with the ball .
However , she lifted over the next few minutes , making a three pointer to take the score to 24 -- 29 , and then running past the opposition to take another great shot which sailed through the basket without touching the hoop to make it 26 -- 29 .
After a half time cheerleading demonstration by the Canberra Sirens Cheerleaders , Hunt , Wilson , Norwood , Cosier and Argossi started in the third quarter .
Argossi posted the first score , making it 35 -- 33 .
A couple of rebounds by Cosier saw Ardossi take two more from the free throw line .
The Fire then fought back to 37 -- 36 .
The game still refused to fall into the usual to-and-from characteristic of basketball .
Bibby missed a shot , Ardossi fell over dramatically , Hunt took the rebound , Wilson tried to get a long shot , and finally Bunton managed to score .
A stumble by Hunt saw a Fire player attempting a lone run at the basket , only to be stopped by Wilson .
Hunt took a long shot to make it 41 -- 38 , Bibby missed another one , and then Hunt got one single handed , bringing it to 43 -- 41 , of which Hunt had scored nine .
Bibby , who had still not scored , was knocked down in a bone crunching collision with an opponent .
The Fire player was not so lucky , and remained on the floor for several minutes .
Bibby was replaced by Casey Samuels .
Two baskets by the Fire tied the score again , but Hunt scored twice more before the three quarter time siren , making it 49 -- 45 .
Hunt scored first for her side in the final quarter , bring the score to 51 -- 47 , of which she was responsible for 15 .
The Fire posted one in response , but a defensive error let Wilson stand on the free throw line and take an uncontested shot .
Alice Coddington scored a three pointer , Samuels a two pointer , and Cosier another three pointer .
The scoreboard now read 61 -- 52 .
A second three pointer by Cosier soon made it 64 -- 52 .
Five men pleaded not guilty yesterday to the rape and murder of a 23-year-old Delhi student .
The accused , Vinay Sharma , Pawan Kumar , Ram Singh , Mukesh Singh and Akshay Thakur , signed statements in the court declaring their innocence .
The five men could face the death penalty if convicted .
The men , on Saturday filed in to the court room with their faces covered , and are next expected to be back in court for a hearing on Monday for the formal start of the trial .
A sixth accused , who is believed to be a 17-year-old , will be tried in a juvenile court and faces a maximum sentence of three years in a reform facility if found guilty .
A juvenile board said it accepted school records showing the juvenile as having been born on June 4 , 1995 .
Police had been seeking a bone ossification test , suspecting that he is older than 17 ; however , the board rejected it stating that it would not be necessary .
The victim , a 23-year-old medical student , and a male friend were attacked after boarding a bus on December 16 in South Delhi .
Police said that the six men accused , beat her male friend with a metal bar and raped her .
The victims were then thrown from the bus naked on the roadside and the woman died from internal injuries two weeks later in Singapore .
The attack set off protests nationwide , sparking debates about the treatment of women in India .
On Friday , the Indian cabinet approved an ordinance to introduce harsher penalties for crimes against women , including the death penalty in extreme cases of rape .
It also approved increasing the maximum seven year sentence for rape to twenty years as well as stricter punishments for crimes such as stalking , cyber stalking and voyeurism .
Ashwani Kumar the Indian Law Minister , said , `` We have taken swift action and hope these steps will make women feel safer in the country . ''
The UNHCR spent three days in January at an Australian facility located on Manus Island , Papua New Guinea .
Following Australian mandatory policy , the more than two hundred detainees held there were detained upon requesting asylum .
More than 30 children are being held at this Australian facility .
The UNHCR report raised the crowded conditions at the camp as a cause for concern , as well as the impact isolation could have on the children .
The UNHCR report made clear Australia does not have a process for clearing the asylum seekers , which means their detention in the camps is indefinite and a violation of international human rights .
O'Connor was named immigration minister this weekend .
The following night , a boat load of 60 refugees who were approached near Christmas Island sought asylum .
Monday , the UNHCR issued its report .
Union leaders , amongst them Brendan 's brother Michael O'Connor who is national secretary of the Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union , are calling for and end to current migration deals .
Amnesty International points out that those migrants held in offshore processing facilities are not typical immigrants but rather asylum seekers .
Moreover , Amnesty International says the practice of offshore facilities for asylum seekers runs afoul of Australia 's own international agreements , such as the UN Refugee Convention , and laws , Australian Migration Act 1958 .
Schavan was accused of uncredited copying from various sources in the dissertation `` Character and Conscience '' she completed in 1980 .
The university 's faculty council began its inquiry two weeks ago prior to yesterday 's vote to strip the minister of her academic title .
News agency DPA has reported she is ready to appeal the decision .
Most of the fifteen-member faculty council voted for withdrawing her doctorate , while two voted against and one abstained .
The investigation began with the support of fourteen of the fifteen members on January 22 .
This decision was made after findings by an anonymous blogger were made public , Schavan had requested the matter be examined , and a preliminary examination completed in fall of 2012 found that around 60 of 351 pages in Schavan 's doctoral thesis contained questionable sections .
Prime Minister Angela Merkel has endorsed Schavan as a minister , who is the second member of her cabinet to be charged with plagiarism .
In 2011 , Defense Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg resigned after a similar case of plagiarism .
Curtis Cooper , a mathematician and computer science professor at the University of Central Missouri , has discovered the largest known prime number to date on January 25 .
Several people verified the discovery using different hardware and software by the beginning of February and it was announced on Tuesday .
Cooper found the prime as a participant in the distributed computing project known as the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search , or GIMPS .
Cooper runs the GIMPS client , called Prime95 , on an estimated 1,000 computers at the university .
The number was first reported to the GIMPS server on January 25 from a university computer which had been running 39 days non-stop .
However as for any Mersenne prime candidates , the discovery was announced after several people have verified the number using different hardware and software .
A prime number is a positive integer greater than 1 that can only be evenly divided by 1 and itself .
The newly discovered prime is expressed as 257,885,161 − 1 and has 17,425,170 digits .
It is a specific type of prime number called a Mersenne prime , which are of the form 2p − 1 .
George Woltman developed and founded GIMPS , the longest known continuously running computer project , in 1996 .
Cooper as a participant had previously discovered two other Mersenne primes , 230,402,457 − 1 in December 2005 and 232,582,657 − 1 in September 2006 , with fellow professor Steven Boone .
This latest discovery ends an intermission of almost four years ; the previous Mersenne prime was found in April 2009 .
The Irish Paddy Power brokers has 11/4 odds with the Canadian Cardinal being chosen as Pope .
Bwin has Ouellet becoming the next Pope with odds at 7/2 .
SkyBet has the betting odd for Ghanian Cardinal Peter Kodwo Appiah Turkson at 7/2 , its best odds for any potential Papal candidate .
Bets are also being taken by Paddy Power for the name of the next Pope , with Peter their odds-on favorite at 2/1 .
Joe is the first Affenpinscher to win Westminster 's Best in Show .
The small black dog beat out six other dogs that had won in their respective contest groups -- Adam , a Smooth Fox Terrier ; Oakley , a German Wirehaired Pointer ; Jewel , an American Foxhound ; Matisse , a Portuguese Water Dog ; Honor , a Bichon Frisé , and crowd favorite Swagger , an Old English Sheepdog -- to win the title .
Tuesday in La Molina , Spain , the president of Governmental Railways of Catalonia , Enric Ticó , and the mayor of Alp , Ramon Moliner , were gifted with flags by representatives of the International Paralympic Committee -LRB- IPC -RRB- and Catalan Government at a ceremony in Colet Museum of Barcelona at one of the first official events ahead of the 2013 IPC Alpine Skiing World Championship , which starts next week .
As of Wednesday , event organisers were still seeking volunteers to assist with running the Championship .
The opening ceremonies are scheduled for next Tuesday .
Entering the event , skiers had the opportunity to qualify through eight World Cup events held with only two disciplines on the program , Giant Slalom and Slalom .
The first four were held in Sestriere , Italy , with the most recent four all being held in St. Moritz , Switzerland .
Standing female French skier Marie Bochet has won six World Cups ahead of the World Championships and is considered by event organizers as a favorite in the standing group .
Russian standing skier Alexey Bugaev is also considered a favorite by organisers as he won two Slalom and one Giant Slalom World Cup competition .
In the women 's sit-ski , German Anna Schaffelhuber is considered the favorite having prepared for the Championships by winning five of the eight World Cup events .
On the men 's sit-ski side , Japanese Takeshi Suzuki and Swiss Christoph Kunz both earned three World Cup victories in the lead up to this competition .
In the women 's visually impaired group , Slovak Henrieta Farkasova will enter the competition with five World Cup victories .
On the men 's side , Spanish Jon Santacana is favored to win with three Giant Slalom and one Slalom victory during this year 's World Cup events in the lead up to the World Championships .
British Combined Services Disabled Ski Team coach Mark Scorgie has noted that this year 's European ski season has been problematic with weather interfering with most competitions .
Poor weather conditions continued Wednesday Rogla IPC Alpine World Cup , with the first Giant Slalom run canceled because of high winds .
The Spanish team includes blind skier Jon Santacana and his guide Miguel Galindo , and blind skier Gabriel Gorce and his guide Arnau Ferrer .
Both vision-impaired skiers are scheduled to compete in the Downhill , Super G , Super Combined , Giant Slalom , and Slalom competitions .
Also on the Spanish team are LW2 classified standing skier Úrsula Pueyo , LW12-1 classified sit skier Óscar Espallargas , and LW10-1 classified sit skier Nathalie Carpanedo who qualified as a wildcard entry .
Pueyo , Espallargas , and Carpanedo are all scheduled to compete in the Slalom and Giant Slalom competitions .
Accompanying the team are to be coaches Javier Gutierrez , Jordi Carbonell , and Andres Gomez , medical staff including Pablo Marquez and Josep Barrachina , and technical staffer Josep Bort .
Russia-based news service RT said an early report indicated 45 people on the plane , which is an Antonov An-24 turboprop .
However , Borodyna said there were 44 people on the 44-seater aircraft .
The aircraft reportedly came to rest in a field , approximately 700 metres off the runway .
Its undercarriage broke , and it overturned and split in three .
Multiple ambulances were sent to the scene .
The state emergency service said because the bodies of the deceased `` sustained severe burns '' , they have not been identified .
Andrey Shishatsky , the governor of the Donetsk region , said `` one man can be seen in the rubble but we do not know whether he is alive or not . ''
One other person , a flight attendant , may have been in the back end of the plane when it crash landed and is unaccounted for .
However , thick fog conditions were reported in Donetsk at the time .
Whether the aircraft overshot the runway or skidded is also uncertain .
Eight fire vehicles with 45 fire workers were alerted to a fire at the Royal Hotel in the town of Dingwall at approximately 0300 UTC Monday .
Numerous people had to be evacuated from the burning building .
The Northern Constabulary launched a joint investigation with the Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service shortly after the fire .
Police are expected to provide the procurator fiscal with a report on the incident .
The council 's decision to remove the # 148,000 -LRB- about US$ 230,000 or $ 172,000 -RRB- subsidy means Benbecula -- Barra flights are to cease operation within the next few weeks .
When the decision comes into effect , travelling between the islands will only be available through the use of ferry services .
The council , which was trying to achieve about # 5 million -LRB- US$ 7.75 million or $ 5.8 million -RRB- in spending reductions , said some 75 % of seats on these flights were vacant .
Angus MacNeil , MP for Na h-Eileanan an Iar in the British Government , and Alasdair Allan , MSP for the same constituency in the Scottish Government , both of whom are SNP members , have criticised the council 's decision .
MacNeil said he was `` disappointed '' about the move and claimed Comhairle nan Eilean Siar was `` axing these services while pocketing the cash '' provided to them by the Scottish Government .
Meanwhile , Allan said the council 's action was `` a significant blow to the community '' .
He said , from Benbecula : `` As someone who used the Barra to Benbecula flight today , it is clear to me what importance this service has in keeping the Western Isles connected . ''
Council leader Angus Campbell subsequently criticised MacNeil for his remarks , saying he was `` extremely disappointed '' by them .
`` The use of the term ` pocketing the money ' shows a disrespect for the democratic process of local Government '' , he said .
He also requested that MacNeil and Allan `` stand shoulder to shoulder with the Comhairle to campaign for increased funding for the Western Isles to help deal with these issues rather than turning on their democratically elected local council over individual issues they do n't particularly like . ''
Ricardo Menéndez , vice president of the Productive Economic Area , said Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez has yearned for the creation of this project to empower Venezuelan construction .
Granito Bolívar is reportedly the most modern Venezuelan granite plant , not consuming community water or electricity , and is also the largest , with a daily capacity to supply enough material for use in construction of about 820 houses .
According to Menéndez , with the help of a state plan , Venezuela intends to exploit its 40,000 million cubic meters or more of granite reserves , generating a set of factories . ''
For the construction of the plant , supplied by 23 quarries , the government of Bolívar provided about 30 million bolívares -LRB- US$ 4.7 million -RRB- and the national government $ 2.3 million -LRB- US$ 3 million -RRB- .
A 19-year-old man has been killed and a 22-year-old man seriously injured as the result of a double shooting incident in Lower Clapton , a district in the east of the British capital London .
The Metropolitan Police -LRB- MPS -RRB- reported the incident taking place on Hindrey Road in Lower Clapton at 2020 UTC Saturday .
Police have not formally identified the younger victim but believe he was Joseph Burke-Monerville .
Another 19-year-old man was sitting in a parked car with the two victims at the time of the incident .
After both victims were hospitalised , Burke-Monerville died a few hours after .
According to police the 22-year-old 's condition in hospital is stable though serious .
The MPS , which is appealing for eyewitnesses to the incident , has yet to arrest any suspects and said it does not know what motivated the shootings .
A spokesperson for the police said : `` At this very early stage we must retain an open mind regarding the circumstances of the incident and any motive . ''
Operation Trident detectives understand two persons were sighted running from the crime scene towards the neighbouring Pembury Estate and are now searching for them .
One is described as having light skin similar to that of a Turkish or Asian person and the other suspect is said to be black .
In the United Kingdom , West Midlands Police charged a 26-year-old man with causing death by dangerous driving after an 80-year-old woman died following a hit and run incident in the Yardley area of the city of Birmingham .
The man 's court appearance was scheduled for today .
The driver of the vehicle that hit her failed to stop at the scene , according to police .
Police said they subsequently discovered a car about six miles from the scene , in the town of Solihull , which they believe is the vehicle used in the incident .
The alleged driver of the car turned himself in and was arrested at the police station in the Stechford area of Birmingham .
After the Gumi presentations , Governor-General Bryce addressed the media about the Gumi , stating that `` It 's so quirky and I love the way it brings this community together , this community that 's known for its fantastic spirit . ''
She also commented on the floods which affected the suburb of North Wagga in March 2012 .
Bryce stated that `` A very special thing for me was being at North Wagga Wagga this morning , to see people again whom I meet almost a year ago after the devastation of the floods in that part of the city , -LSB- ... -RSB- So many people have a long way to recover but their spirit , resilience , courage and determination , what they 've been though , is a source for inspiration to all of us . ''
In the United Kingdom , television presenter Derek Batey has died at the age of 84 .
Yesterday , ITV Border , the company for whom he used to work , said Batey died Sunday night in a hospice near his Lytham St Annes residence in Lancashire , England after experiencing a brief illness .
According to BBC News Online , Batey first worked in broadcasting for the BBC .
He went on to work for Carlisle-based Border Television , which is now called ITV Border , from its inception in 1961 .
He continued to work at the station for about 25 years , gaining the nickname ` Mr Border ' as a result .
Batey was notable for presenting the game show Mr. and Mrs. , a format which he developed for Border Television after seeing a similar game show on Canadian television .
Batey presented 500 episodes of the TV programme , which tested married persons on their knowledge of their partners to see which which couple had the best knowledge of each other .
At its peak in the 1970s , the programme achieved nine million viewers .
Batey adapted the game show into a successful stage show which he presented 5000 times .
Batey also presented a talk show called Look Who 's Talking .
Recalling the basis for the launch of the series , Batey said : '' -LSB- T -RSB- here was n't a lot of theatre in the Border area and we thought if we could bring the national names to Carlisle and invite the audiences in , it is a chance to see names where they could n't see elsewhere , so we did that . ''
Both Mr. and Mrs. and Look Who 's Talking were originally regional programmes and were later broadcast across the ITV Network , Batey reported .
Harry King , a former colleague and friend of Derek Batey , described him as `` a proud Cumbrian -LSB- ... -RSB- a people person and was never happier than when he was talking to people .
King described Mr. and Mrs. as `` iconic '' and said Batey `` would always let the people he was talking to take the limelight '' .
ITV News Border reporter Matthew Taylor said Batey `` will leave a lasting legacy in this region '' .
Russian B2 classified skier Alexandra Frantseva and guide Pavel Zabotini finished in second .
B3 classified British skier Kelly Gallagher and guide Charlotte Evans finished in third place .
United States B2 classified skier Danelle Umstead and guide Robert Umstead finished just off the podium in fourth place .
The women 's visually impaired skiers are next scheduled to compete on Friday in the Super-G event , with a start time of approximately 9:30 local time , 8:30 UTC .
Farkašová then tries to get her second gold , out of the five she targets at these Championships .
Santacana won gold in the Super-G , Super Combined , and Giant slalom events in the last World Championships held in Sestriere , Italy , in 2011 , in which he also won silver in Downhill and Slalom .
Skiers were expecting to have the day off , with a Sport Forum originally on the schedule for today and the Super-G on the schedule for tomorrow .
Some skiers competing were not scheduled to arrive in La Molina until today .
The race is scheduled to start at 10:30 European Central Standard Time .
There are 6 scheduled starters for the women 's visually impaired group including yesterday 's downhill gold medalist Henrieta Farkašová , 11 women in the standing group , 8 women in the sitting group , 16 men in the visually impaired group including Spaniards Jon Santacana and Gabriel Gorce , 22 men in the standing group including Australian Mitchell Gourley and New Zealander Adam Hall , and 29 men in the sitting group
Following the second full day of competition at the IPC Alpine World Championships in La Molina , Spain yesterday , Austria led the medal race with three gold medals , a silver , and a bronze .
Markus Salcher won gold in the men 's standing downhill on Wednesday , with Matthias Lanzinger also making the podium in the bronze medal position .
Claudia Lösch earned a gold in the women 's sitting Super-G event .
Slacher and Lanzinger went gold/silver yesterday in the men 's standing Super-G to round out Austria 's medal total .
France leads in the total medal count with six , two of each kind .
Yohann Taberlet won a bronze in the men 's sitting downhill .
Marie Bochet won a gold and Solene Jambaque won a bronze in the women 's standing downhill .
In the Super-G , Bochet and Jambaque went gold/silver .
Taberlet earned a silver in the Super-G .
With only eighteen medals available a day , a number of countries have failed to make the medal podium .
They include the Netherlands , with Anna Jochemsen finishing ninth in the women 's standing class in the Super-G yesterday , and Finland with Katja Saarinen finishing tenth in the same event .
Czech competitor Oldrich Jelinek finished sixteenth in the men 's sitting Super-G .
Arly Velasquez of Mexico finished fifteenth in the men 's sitting Super-G .
New Zealand 's Adam Hall finished ninth in the men 's standing Super-G .
Poland 's men 's visually impaired skier Maciej Krezel and guide Anna Ogarzynska finished thirteenth in the Super-G .
Turkey 's Erik Bayindirli finished nineteenth in the men 's sitting Super-G .
Last Thursday , British sensory biologist Dominic Clarke and other authors published research about detection of floral electric fields by bees in journal Science .
The research involved studying bees ' reaction to flowers with different electric fields .
The researches concluded that bees can choose flowers based on their electric fields , and remember them as they do with color and other characteristics of flowers .
DC : The two big questions now are `` how do the bees do this ? ''
The first is a case of pinning down the sensory mechanism used by the bees to detect the fields , and the second will involve a great deal of field-based experiments .
We need to get out of the laboratory and understand the role this phenomenon plays in the lives of bees in the wild .
It has been suggested that the electric field that arises between a charged bee and a grounded flower may be responsible for increasing the efficiency of pollen transfer between the two .
We looked at this literature as sensory biologists and naturally formed the question ` can bees sense these fields ? ' .
In our experiment , the flowers that were rewarded -LRB- with a sugary solution -RRB- were marked with a small electric field -LRB- about the same strength as around a flower in the wild -RRB- .
The ones that were not rewarded were not marked with fields .
Since the electric field is the only thing that differs between the two flowers , we know that if the bees can learn to tell them apart , they can sense the electric field .
Our bees were able to pick the rewarded flower 80 % of the time when the electric field was present as a cue .
When the electric field was switched off , they could only get it right half the time , which is the same as if they were just picking flowers at random .
These two species provide the bulk of our data , but we do consider other flowers like geraniums , daisies , clematis and foxglove , and other species of bee -LRB- particularly the honeybee Apis mellifera -RRB- .
DC : The behavioural tests were carried out in a laboratory because we needed to be able to precisely control the environment in which the bees were tested .
Future work will be aimed at trying to get out into the bees ' natural environment and trying to figure out exactly what role -LRB- s -RRB- this sense plays in their lives .
DC : Charge was measured using a device called a `` Faraday Pail '' .
It is basically an electrically shielded metal cup , the voltage of which changes according to how much charge is inside it .
We can measure this voltage when a bee flies in and so measure its charge .
I carried out the bulk of the experimental work and data analysis , but the process of designing the experiment , figuring out how to do the analysis , choosing which ideas to follow and which to put on the shelf etc. , that is highly collaborative .
Then of course comes the long period of writing , re-writing , re-re-writing , sending out to colleagues for feedback , re-re-re-writing , submission , peer-review , editing re-submission etc. which is also a collaboration between all the authors .
Going into the third scheduled day of competition at the IPC Alpine World Championships in La Molina , Spain yesterday , the United States para-alpine team has delivered with a gold medal won by Laurie Stephens in the women 's sitting downhill , a silver medal won by men 's sit skier Stephen Lawler in the downhill , and bronze medal won by Laurie Stephens in the women 's sitting Super-G .
The United States finished two days of competition fifth overall in the medal count , tied with Russia .
A few members of Team USA had difficulties , and were not able to start or finish their races .
In the men 's sitting downhill , Kurka did not finish .
LW12-2 women 's sit-skier Victor also did not start in the downhill event .
Visually-impaired B3 classified skier Bathum chatted with his guide , Sean Ramsden , immediately following both his races .
While he was unhappy with his downhill run , Bathum was happy with and had fun during his seventh place run in the Super-G event where he finished with a factored time of 1:13.51 , only 3.02 seconds slower than the winning time set by Spanish skier Jon Santacana .
United States skiers were scheduled to compete yesterday in the Slalom discipline but the competition was cancelled due to high winds .
Friday 's scheduled event had been rescheduled as a result of predicted snow and high winds during the day .
No snow arrived until late in the afternoon , where there was limited accumulation .
Some of the younger members of Team USA took advantage of the night off on Thursday to go bowling before a busy training day Friday .
In other United States Paralympic news , Sir Philip Craven , the President of the International Paralympic Committee , told a Wikinews reporter the country will have live television coverage of the 2016 Summer Paralympics in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil .
When a member of Team USA competing in La Molina was asked if they heard confirmation of this , they were unable to confirm .
They did highlight the lack of United States media coverage was frustrating for fans wanting to follow the Games in London .
According to the skier , many people he knew could only follow the Games by searching for video on sites like YouTube .
George Osborne , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , said that the move to lower the credit rating was a `` stark reminder '' of the debt problems that the country is facing and that the government is planning to stick to it 's original deficit reduction plan .
The British economy shrank by 0.3 % in the final quarter of 2012 and output remained flat throughout last year - the economy would have to grow in the first quarter of 2013 in order to avoid a recession .
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development warned George Osborne last month that he should slow down the rate of his deficit reduction and austerity programme if Britain entered a triple-dip recession .
The Labour Party has said that the government must reduce the number of spending cuts and focus on growth .
Ed Balls , the Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer , said : `` This credit rating downgrade is a humiliating blow to a Prime Minister and Chancellor who said keeping our AAA rating was the test of their economic and political credibility . ''
Carbon monoxide poisoning is thought to have been the cause of the deaths of three people and one Jack Russell dog in a caravan park in Cornwall in South West England .
Cornwall Fire and Rescue Service -LRB- CFRS -RRB- were alerted to the incident in Tremarle Home Park in the town of Camborne at 12:56 UTC on Saturday .
Inspector David Eldridge said Devon and Cornwall Police were alerted to the caravan park incident after `` a helper had been unable to get a reply from an elderly couple who lived in the caravan '' .
He said that upon their arrival , `` We were able to see that there was a figure sat in a chair but they were unresponsive to knocks at the door . ''
CFRS workers called to the area `` forced entry into the property and found that the three occupants were all dead '' , Inspector Eldridge said .
The Health and Safety Executive is now investigating the incident but the deaths are not considered as being of a suspicious nature .
The three fatalities have been identified as Audrey Cook , aged 86 , her husband Alfred , aged 90 , and Maureen , their 46-year-old daughter .
David Biggs , a member of Camborne Town Council , said the incident came as `` a shock '' to him ; Tremarle Home Park is `` a well established facility and is very well run '' , according to him .
Biggs described the loss of three lives as an `` appalling tragedy '' .
Carbon monoxide is a poisonous , colourless , tasteless and odourless gas which is created when such carbon-based fuels as oil , gas , coal and wood are not completely incinerated .
The human body 's capacity to hold oxygen in the blood can be reduced by inhalation of the gas , which in turn may cause death .
The Gas Safe Register has said dizziness , headaches , queasiness , lack of ability to breathe , fainting and losing consciousness are all symptoms of a person experiencing carbon monoxide poisoning .
In the United Kingdom , Strathclyde Police arrested a 24-year-old man and a 26-year-old woman in relation to the death of a man in Glasgow , Scotland , reports said yesterday .
Paul Cunningham , a 35-year-old male , was discovered dead February 11 at approximately 18:15 UTC , in his apartment on Aberdour Street in the Dennistoun district of Glasgow .
The two suspects are scheduled to appear before Glasgow Sheriff Court today .
The procurator fiscal is expected to receive a report about the incident .
Strathclyde Police announced the launch of a murder inquiry into Cunningham 's death on February 14 .
On that day , Detective Chief Inspector Colin Carey from Strathclyde Police 's Major Investigation Team reported the last sighting of Cunningham being made by a friend at approximately 11:00 UTC on February 8 .
`` I am anxious to speak to anyone who saw him after this , or anyone who knew of his whereabouts over the past weekend , '' Carey requested .
Earlier today , vision impaired South Korean skier Jae Rim Yang and her guide Soungmii Park finished fifth in the women 's vision impaired slalom event with a combined time of 2:24.47 for both runs at IPC Alpine World Championships in La Molina , Spain .
The other South Korean skier who finished today was Chi Won Lee , who finished ninth in the men 's sitting slalom group .
Both Yang and Lee finished last in their respective groups on a day that saw thirty-six skiers not finishing their first runs and another eleven disqualified following their first runs , and another fifteen skiers who earned did not finishes following their second runs .
This group included South Korean men 's sit skier Jong Seork Park who did not finish his first run .
The slalom event was held today after being canceled early yesterday after some skiers had already skied down the mountain .
Yesterday in La Molina , Spain on the third day of competition at the IPC Alpine World Championships , slalom gold medal winning French skiers Marie Bochet and Vincent Gauthier-Manuel assisted in putting France in the medal count lead .
This brought the total number medals won by French skiers to eight .
New Zealand , with only two skiers competing , earned its first medal of the competition when Adam Hall won a bronze in yesterday 's slalom event .
His teammate Corey Peters finished his first run in the slalom but notched a Did Not Finish -LRB- DNF -RRB- for his second run and did not rank .
Spain moved down the medal table after their medal favorite , Jon Santacana and guide Miguel Galindo Garcés , failed to finish his second run in the slalom .
Other Spanish skiers also failed to perform yesterday with wildcard entry women 's sit-skier Nathalie Carpanedo and men 's sit-skier Óscar Espallargas earning a DNF during their first runs on a day that saw thirty-six skiers earn DNFs on their initial run down the course .
Men 's visually impaired skier Gabriel Gorce and guide Arnau Ferrer were disqualified in the first run for missing gate 61 .
Standing LW2 classified skier Úrsula Pueyo finished ninth and last in her group .
Yesterday was originally scheduled to be a day off for skiers , but the slalom event was cancelled Saturday due to poor conditions .
Yesterday , women 's standing LW4 classified skier Laura Valeanu finished eighth in her group in the slalom event , marking the first appearance of a Romanian skier at the 2013 IPC Alpine World Championships in La Molina , Spain .
No other Romanian skiers have competed thus far in the competition .
Valeanu completed her first slalom run in La Molina in a time of 1:16.48 , the eighth best time on that run .
In the women 's visually impaired downhill , Kelly Gallagher and guide Charlotte Evans earned a bronze medal on the first day of competition .
Gallagher and Evans were the only members of Team GB to compete in the downhill event .
Gallagher and Evans earned a silver on the second day of competition in the Super-G event , with Jade Etherington and guide John Clark earning a bronze medal in the same group .
The 2013 IPC Alpine World Championships is scheduled to continue today with the Super Combined event .
Following accusations that he engaged in `` inappropriate acts '' with three priests and a former priest , Cardinal Keith O'Brien resigned yesterday from his post as Archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh .
O'Brien had been expected to take part in the papal conclave to decide the next Pope and to retire shortly thereafter .
O'Brien had tendered a resignation to the Pope nunc pro tunc -LRB- now for later -RRB- on November 13 .
He stated yesterday that it had taken effect : `` The Holy Father has now decided that my resignation will take effect today , 25 February 2013 , and that he will appoint an apostolic administrator to govern the archdiocese in my place until my successor as archbishop is appointed . ''
The sexual abuse allegations were published in The Observer and stem from incidents alleged to have happened as long as three decades ago .
The former priest alleges O'Brien approached him inappropriately when he was a seminarian at St Andrew 's College in Drygrange in 1980 .
The former priest claims his resignation from the priesthood was the result of O'Brien 's elevation to bishop : `` I knew then he would always have power over me .
The three priests allege they were also the subject of unwanted sexual advances from O'Brien .
The four complained to Antonio Mennini , the Vatican 's ambassador to Britain .
After the story was made public on Sunday , the Vatican confirmed Pope Benedict had been made aware of the complaints .
O'Brien disputes the allegations .
The auxiliary bishop in the Archdiocese of St Andrews and Edinburgh , Bishop Stephen Robson , gave a statement : `` A number of allegations of inappropriate behaviour have been made against the cardinal .
The cardinal has sought legal advice and it would be inappropriate to comment at this time .
The cardinal had been outspoken in his condemnation of proposals to legalise same-sex marriage , calling it a `` grotesque subversion of a universally accepted human right '' , and saying gay relationships are `` harmful to the physical , mental and spiritual wellbeing of those involved '' .
Last year , the gay rights charity Stonewall awarded O'Brien the title of `` bigot of the year '' .
The gay rights campaigner Peter Tatchell described O'Brien as `` hypocritical '' : `` He appears to have preached one thing in public while doing something different in private .
It is estimated that around 40 % of Catholic priests in Britain are gay , which makes the church 's opposition to gay equality so two-faced and absurd . ''
After suffering severe frostbite the British explorer Sir Ranulph Fiennes has decided to pull out from The Coldest Journey expedition across Antarctica .
He is now on his way to Cape Town after several days of blizzard conditions halted his evacuation .
Despite his withdrawal , the expedition is to continue without him and his fellow team members are to trek the 2,000 miles -LRB- 3,219 km -RRB- across Antarctica from Novolazarevskaya Station -LRB- Novo -RRB- to the Ross Sea starting on March 21 , at the autumnal equinox and approaching winter , taking six months .
A team successfully travelled approximately 70km to transport him by snowmobile to the Princess Elisabeth Station .
He is now to be flown on to Novo for a flight to Cape Town .
Expedition organiser Tony Medniuk told the BBC , `` After five years of preparation , a small slip like this and a few moments can undermine the most meticulous preparation '' .
Ian Prickett , a member of the team , said on Twitter `` Sir Ran is leaving but we will carry on . ''
The team hopes to raise US$ 10 million -LRB- # 6.2 million -RRB- for avoidable-blindness charity Seeing is Believing .
This is to be the first time any human has walked across Antarctica during winter and the expedition team are bracing themselves for cold around -90 C and near-permanent darkness .
Guinness World Records has called Sir Ranulph `` the world 's greatest living explorer '' .
In the past he became the first person to reach both the North and South Pole by surface as well as the oldest Briton , at age 65 , to reach the summit of Mount Everest in 2009 .
Another British explorer , Captain Scott , died a century ago on his Antarctic expedition after being caught out by the beginning of winter .
Yesterday , following the Super Combined event at the 2013 IPC Alpine World Championships , Austria took the lead again in the medal count having earned six total gold medals across four days of competition .
France is tied with Austria in the overall medal count .
Following her gold medal winning , Loesch told the media she was super happy she won , and she had a really good slalom run .
Spain 's vision impaired skier Jon Santacana , who won Spain 's only two medals in the competition , failed to finish his second run in the Super Combined .
Williamson hugged silver medalist Miroslav Haraus of Slovakia , and Santacana when Santacana and guide Miguel Galindo Garcés returned to the finishing area after Santacana 's fall .
Spain 's other entrant in the men 's visually impaired Super Combined event , Gabriel Gorce and guide Arnau Ferrer , finished three thousandths of a second out of medal contention with a combined run time of 1:47.93 .
At the finish of each competitor 's second run , most are requested to go to doping control to insure they are not taking any banned substance .
The 2013 IPC Alpine World Championships are scheduled to continue today .
On the final day of individual competition at the 2013 IPC Alpine World Championships in La Molina , Spain , concluded today with the Giant Slalom , France pulled ahead of Austria to sit atop of the medal ladder with seven gold medals , two silver medals , and three bronze medals to Austria 's seven gold medals , one silver medal , and three bronze medals .
Canada earned the most overall medals at the World Championships with fourteen total medals , two more than France .
France 's medals today included a gold by Marie Bochet in the women 's standing event .
Bochet captured all five individual gold medals available in her group at these World Championships .
Vincent Gauthier-Manuel also earned a gold for France , in the men 's standing group .
Claudia Loesch earned a gold for Austria in the women 's sitting group .
The final day of skiing saw 117 skiers start , with only 72 getting ranked at the end .
28 skiers earned DNFs during the first run , and nine earned DNFs during their second runs .
Five did not start the first run , and one did not start their second run .
Two skiers were disqualified in their second runs .
The IPC Alpine World Championships wrapped up yesterday in La Molina , Spain with a friendly , non-medal counting team event won by Austria .
The winner was tabulated based on the fastest score for a visually impaired skier on the team , a female skier on the team , and a male skier on the team .
The Austrian team included Markus Salcher , Roman Rabl , and Claudia Loesch for times counted , with Philipp Bonadimann , Thomas Grochar , and Martin Wuerz also competing .
The team event included ten teams representing eight countries , with the United States and Canada having two teams each and 54 skiers competing .
The United States team 1 came in second with Tyler Walker , Mark Bathum , and Alana Nichols times counting , and Heath Calhoun , Ralph Green , and Allison Jones also belonging to the team .
Russia came in third with Ivan Frantseva , Alexandr Alyabyev , and Mariya Papulova having their scores counted .
Hosts Spain finished last with Jon Santacana , Óscar Espallargas , and Úrsula Pueyo having their times counting , and Gabriel Gorce and Nathalie Carpanedo also members of the Spanish team .
On the first day of competition , Gourley finished tied in thirteenth place with Swiss skier Thomas Pfyl in the downhill with a time of 1:36.40 , 6.66 seconds off the winning time set by Austria 's Markus Salcher .
In the Super-G event on the second day of competition , Gourley finished in eleventh place with a time of 1:16.90 seconds , 4.41 seconds behind winner Salcher .
On the third competition day , Gourley earned an eighth place finish in the Slalom with a combined run time of 2:09.66 , 3.37 seconds slower than seventh place finisher Andrzej Szczesny of Poland and 13.81 seconds behind winner Vincent Gauthier-Manuel of France .
28 skiers started the Slalom event but only 13 managed to place .
Gourley had his best finish in the Super Combined event where he finished in fifth position with a combined run time of 1:45.34 , 0.15 seconds slower than fourth place finisher Russian Alexandr Alyabyev and 2.90 seconds slower than Austrian winner Matthias Lanzinger .
On the last day of competition , Gourley successfully finished his first run in the Giant Slalom but finished with a Did Not Finish as a result of his second run .
His Australian teammates , including Jessica Gallagher , Melissa Perrine , Toby Kane , and Cameron Rahles Rahbula , missed the Championships either because they needed a small break from this season 's competition schedule or to give themselves additional time to train for the Sochi Test event coming up next month .
With the IPC Alpine World Championships officially ending Wednesday with the conclusion of the national team non-medal friendly competition a day after the competition 's official closing ceremony , New Zealand 's Adam Hall and Corey Peters have completed their run .
Their country did not compete in the team competition as they did not have enough skiers to form a team .
With their first event the second race of the competition , Hall finished ninth in the men 's standing Super-G with a time of 1:16.65 , 4.16 seconds off the winning time set by Austrian Markus Salcher .
Peters finished the Super-G with a time of 1:18.95 in the men 's sitting group for a 22 place finish in a field of 25 skiers .
Hall had his best finish at the Championships on the third day of competition when he earned a bronze medal in the Slalom .
Peters did not fair as well , earning a Did Not Finish -LRB- DNF -RRB- during his second run in the Slalom and consequently not ranking .
In the Super Combined , Hall finished ninth with a combined run time of 1:49.87 , 7.43 seconds slower than first place finisher Austrian Matthias Lanzinger .
Peters 's problems continued , as he earned a DNF during his first run .
Peters finished tenth in the Giant Slalom , with a combined run time of 2:37.73 , 21.93 seconds slower than Japanese gold medalist Taiki Morri .
Hall skipped the event .
Most recently , the country saw success when Hall won a gold medal in the men 's standing event at the 2010 Winter Paralympics in Vancouver .
Abou Zeid is a senior commander in the Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb who are fighting French-backed Malian forces , he was killed along with 40 other militants four days ago in the Adrar des Ifoghas mountain range .
President Deby said in a statement on Friday : `` Chadian forces killed two jihadi leaders , including Abou Zeid '' , `` On February 22 , we lost several soldiers in the Ifogha mountains after destroying the jihadists ' base .
Chadian troops have been involved in helping to fight off troops as part of a wider African force and they have been playing a key role in trying to free Northern Mali .
A French government spokesperson , Najat Vallaud-Belkacem warned that reports of his death were as yet unconfirmed .
Al-Qaeda are currently holding seven French nationals hostages in Sahel and there are no confirmed reports that they have been executed .
Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez died this afternoon at 16:25 local time , Minister Nicolás Maduro said .
We 've got to grow out of this pain .
Chávez had not been seen in public since December , and in February he was brought from Cuba to Venezuela , to be admitted at the Hospital Militar in Caracas .
Information Minister Ernesto Villegas recently said Chávez was suffering from a new infection that was affecting his breathing , and was undergoing `` intensive chemotherapy . ''
Unidad , batalla y victoria , con la unidad del Pueblo y la FANB , Maduro said after announcing Chávez 's death .
Wednesday , a team of researchers at the University of East Anglia , Norwich , United Kingdom published a study of the increasing deer population in the United Kingdom , in the Journal of Wildlife Management .
Dr. Paul Dolman : In North America and parts of Europe including the UK , increasing deer populations are changing the structure of forest habitats .
This has knock-on effects on plant communities , bird and small mammal populations , with a reduction in the numbers of woodland birds that need a complex shrub layer .
In Britain , declines in a number of woodland bird species have been linked to increases in deer numbers .
Other problems include damage to agricultural crops , and increased numbers of deer-related road traffic accidents .
There has not yet been sufficient detailed work to disentangle their effects , but it appears that fallow deer and muntjac have particularly strong effects on woodlands and other biodiversity .
Dr. Paul Dolman : Increases in deer populations are at least partly related to the historic removal of large predators -LRB- including species such as wolf , brown bear and lynx -RRB- , as well as the abundance of nutritious cropland .
Six were killed , two injured in Warren , Ohio yesterday after teenagers in an acquired Honda Passport hit a guardrail and overturned into a pond .
High speed contributed to the crash , investigators with the state highway patrol reported .
The SUV sank , with five teenagers inside .
The sixth fatality was found under the car .
Two other passengers escaped , ran to a phone , and called emergency services .
The survivors , 18-year-old Brian Henry and 15-year-old Asher Lewis , were taken to the hospital and released .
Leuitenant Holt said the vehicle in question was not reported stolen but the teenagers did not have permission to use it .
The car belonged to a Youngstown resident .
A friend of Behner , 18-year-old Rick Bowling , said , `` He was one of a kind -LSB- ... -RSB- Everyone knew him in the neighborhood .
In school , he always made everyone laugh .
Wintry conditions are causing widespread disruption across parts of northwestern Europe over the past two days .
Heavy snow as well as sub-zero temperatures have resulted in cancellations of hundreds of flights and caused traffic disruptions on major roads .
Many hundreds of passengers became stranded at Frankfurt Airport in Germany on Tuesday night as the airport closed , with many more flights cancelled yesterday .
Tuesday in Paris , at the Charles de Gaulle Airport a quarter of the flights were cancelled .
At Orly Airport a landing Tunisair slid , prompting evacuation of 140 passengers .
The Eurostar train service which connects London , United Kingdom with Paris , France and Brussels , Belgium was suspended after heavy snow .
Many drivers stayed in their cars overnight in south Britain .
Maria Fanucchi from the Montmartre area of Paris said , `` It was a winter wonderland for a day -LRB- yesterday -LSB- Tuesday -RSB- -RRB- , but now it 's melting very fast .
The streets are full of a dirty , slushy mix of black snow and water -LSB- ... -RSB- -LSB- my -RSB- trip to The Hague was canceled because the bus company did n't want to risk getting stuck in the snow . ''
Helena Kristiansson from Brussels said she was stuck on a road for nine hours in 65 kilometers of queues ; she tweeted , `` Stuck at a road for Brussels closed since 5pm yesterday due to shoulder deep snow . .
Belgium had over 1,600 kilometers of traffic jams during the Tuesday morning rush hour , reported the Touring breakdown assistance association , as lying snow on roads made driving difficult .
The Belgian Pensions Minister Alexander De Croo struggled to attend the cabinet budget meeting as the snow hit .
He said , `` The budget wo n't be simple , but just getting into Brussels to get started is a task of a different order altogether '' .
Police say a Swiss national was gang-raped whilst on a camping holiday with her husband in the Datia district of Madhya Pradesh , India .
Madhya Pradesh Police arrested five men yesterday in connection with the attack on the couple , which took place Friday evening .
A gang allegedly beat the woman and her husband , as well as stealing a laptop , a mobile phone , and about 10,000 -LRB- US$ 185 -RRB- in cash .
The woman , reportedly age 39 , was taken to a nearby hospital in the city of Gwalior .
Police said she has not suffered any major injuries and medical evidence confirmed rape .
A local police official , S M Afzal , stated the attackers `` tied up the man and raped the woman in his presence '' .
Sub-divisional police officer ML Dhody said , `` They were coming from Orchha on a bicycle and they decided to stay in a forest .
They were beaten up by a few people who took away their laptops '' .
The Swiss ambassador to India , Linus von Castelmur , has spoken to the victim and promised all assistance .
The embassy said : `` The embassy is most distressed with the gang rape of a Swiss national in Madhya Pradesh .
The ambassador has been able to speak to the victim and her partner and has assured them of all possible support .
Mamata Sharma , chair of the Indian National Commission for Women , said changes needed to be made in how rape cases are dealt with .
She said , `` I have said this for the past few days that the crime against women in Madhya Pradesh is increasing and the government should take stringent action to put an end to such incidents -LSB- ... -RSB- The accused should be punished and we should see that what kind of image of India we are presenting to the outside world .
The government should take a strict action '' .
Sir Craig Reedie of Great Britain is leading the IOC delegation , whom Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy greeted at the start of their inspection process .
On a cold but sunny day yesterday , the IOC visited four sites on their first inspection date including Real Madrid 's Santiago Bernabéu Stadium , Buen Retiro park and bullfighting ring Las Ventas .
Today , the IOC is scheduled to visit the proposed venues for the Olympic village and stadium .
The inspection is scheduled to last four days .
As Spain is currently undergoing severe economic problems at the moment , with 26 % unemployment currently and public debt in 2012 at 84 % of the country 's gross domestic product , the $ 1.5 bn -LRB- US$ 1.9 bn , # 1.3 bn -RRB- costs of the Games have been a highly visible aspect of the city 's bid process .
Security costs are estimated to add another $ 149m -LRB- US$ 192m , # 127m -RRB- to organizing costs .
Proponents of the bid including Madrid 's mayor Ana Botella believe the Games would provide an economic boost to the city and the country .
IOC President Jacques Rogge is also on the record as stating that he does not believe Spanish economic problems will play a part in the IOC 's decision-making process .
Spanish newspaper El Mundo quoted Rogge saying , `` The crisis does not affect it , because substantial facilities have in most cases already been built .
Local organizers have promised to follow the legacy of London , using historical landmarks and existing venues with 80 % of proposed venues , 28 of 35 , already in place , and providing a roadmap for future development of Olympic sites to avoid any `` white elephants '' that are unused after the Games , a situation that happened with a number of Athens Olympic venues .
Madrid 's bid Chief Executive Victor Sánchez , quoted by Agence France-Presse , explained they avoided '' -LSB- p -RSB- rojects that have no real use for citizens after the Games have finished .
Madrid is one of three cities currently competing for the 2020 Games .
The IOC visited Tokyo , Japan earlier this month and is scheduled to visit Istanbul , Turkey later this month .
The host city is to be formally selected at a meeting of the IOC on September 7 in Buenos Aires , Argentina .
Shortly after that , Rogge is scheduled to step down from his position as IOC President .
A package of six media reform bills introduced last week before Australia 's Parliament -- including one proposing appointing a Public Interest Media Advocate -LRB- PIMA -RRB- to monitor print and online sectors -- was shelved yesterday by the Australian Labor Party , with only two passed before a seven week break for the country 's legislative body .
Stephen Conroy , the Minister for Broadband , Communications and the Digital Economy , had hoped to see the legislation package passed by the end of the week .
The Parliament of Australia summarized Public Interest Media Advocate Bill 2013 as , `` Part of a package of six bills in relation to the media sector , the bill : creates the independent statutory office of the Public Interest Media Advocate -LRB- PIMA -RRB- ; provides for the functions , appointment , and terms and conditions of PIMA ; and requires an annual report to be prepared on PIMA 's activities and other specified matters . ''
Other bills in the package delineate what PIMA 's role would be .
Unlike the other bills in the package which have not had a third reading before being shelved , the former bill deals primarily with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and Special Broadcasting Service , while the latter bill increased licensing fees for television stations .
On Monday , the Australian Associated Press -LRB- AAP -RRB- released a statement saying such government oversight is not required .
Other Australian media organizations have protested the proposed legislation .
Australia 's The Daily Telegraph is quoted by the Brisbane Times describing this legislation as an `` aggressive attempt to silence your media . ''
Former federal court judge Ray Finkelstein oversaw an inquiry into the Australian print media in 2011 .
He told a government inquiry , `` There are no powerful groups in society that can come along to governments or anybody and say ` we can do what we like when we like and there 's nothing you should do about it ' . ''
Finkelstein is also on the record as stating that self regulation by the industry through their own organization has failed .
Canberra CBD Limited -LRB- CCBD -RRB- released data this week about a urinal trial in the Australian Capital Territory -LRB- ACT -RRB- 's Central Business District -LRB- CBD -RRB- this past weekend that showed the temporary urinals collected 220 litres of urine in a four day period between 7pm and 7am on Thursday , Friday , Saturday and Sunday nights .
A number of businesses in the CBD had complained about men using storefronts and streets to relieve themselves despite the possibility of AU$ 200 on-the-spot fines .
277 people have been fined in the territory in the past year , with 228 of them being fined for public urination in the CBD .
The urinals were placed in a number of public places including Verity Lane , at the bus interchange on the corner of Alinga Street and Verity Lane , and on City Walk near the corner of Saraton Lane .
They have small doors at hip level to provide some degree of privacy despite their very public location .
Barcham , writing on The Riot-ACT , notes the privacy afforded to men is limited as the doors appear to be for very short men , saying `` The doors sit well below ` business ' level , meaning they wo n't actually provide privacy to anyone over 5 foot tall . ''
The urinal trial is scheduled to continue over Easter weekend .
In a press release issued by CCBD , CCBD 's chief executive officer is quoted as saying , `` Canberra CBD is focussed on providing a clean and safe city for the broader Canberra community .
Before the start of the trial , CCBD said if the trial proved successful , the ACT government could consider making the urinals a permanent fixture in the CBD .
Kros Urinals is maintaining the urinals .
The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters awarded Belgian mathematician Pierre Deligne with Abel prize of 2013 for his contributions toward shaping algebraic geometry .
The award includes a 6 million Norwegian kroner -LRB- US$ 1,026,000 , $ 793,000 -RRB- prize .
Timothy Gowers , a mathematician from Cambridge University , announced the award in Oslo yesterday .
This concept is related to analysis of the prime-counting function and the currently unsolved Riemann 's hypothesis .
During the proof of the Weil conjecture , a concept of l-adic cohomology was introduced .
Pierre Deligne said , `` The nice thing about mathematics is doing mathematics .
The prizes come in addition '' .
Anonymous people submitted a video depicting employees of Inghams Enterprises , an Australian poultry producer , to Animal Liberation .
The video displays animal cruelty at an Inghams plant in Tahmoor , Macarthur Region , south-west of Sydney .
The video was recorded without the employees ' knowledge over a two-week period in February .
Animal Liberation maintains that the footage is legitimate .
Spokesperson for Animal Liberation Emma Hurst stated to Sydney Morning Herald , `` You can see a total disrespect of these animals .
There are scenes where they 've put the music up very , very loud , the workers are screaming , jumping about , dancing , picking up the turkeys , dancing while holding onto the turkeys , throwing them onto the shackles , and just that whole mentality as though these animals do n't have feelings , that they 're objects . ''
Using CCTV , over 140 hours were recorded , depicting 136 incidences of animal cruelty as well as aggravated animal cruelty , resulting in the animals ' death or severe conditions .
Ms. Hurst said , `` Hanging upside down , their legs are already brittle , and we 've got footage as well where their legs have actually ripped off from their bodies ... and the legs have been tossed around . ''
Animal Liberation and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals -LRB- RSPCA -RRB- are again calling for the mandatory installation of CCTV cameras in all Australian abattoirs .
RSPCA New South Wales chief inspector David O'Shannessy told the ABC that surveillance and inspections of abattoirs should be commonplace in Australia .
`` The CCTV would certainly send a strong signal to those people working with animals that their welfare is of the highest priority . ''
Inghams CEO Kevin McBain released a statement saying that an investigation had been launched into the `` intolerable incidents '' .
On Saturday , Discovery Science Place hosted a mini Maker Faire in Tyler , Texas .
A large modular analog synthesizer was also available for attendees to experiment with , designed by staff at Synthesizers.com .
Some exhibits were quite simple , showing how to modify inexpensive radio-controlled cars using epoxy and LEGO bricks .
Two three-dimensional printers were displayed , showing attendees how the new technology operates .
Outdoor exhibits included multiple forms of robots and flying drone-style aircraft -LRB- see video below -RRB- .
According to a news release , the event is one of 60 planned to occur worldwide this year .
Numerous volunteers were on hand to assist with the event .
Colleges and university groups were on hand , including representatives from The University of Texas at Tyler , among others .
The new species , called Tylototriton ziegleri , is characterised by a unique morphology , most noticeably the rough skin .
The researchers noticed the new set of species features when examining a specimen in National Museum of Nature and Science , Tokyo and confirmed the species after a field study and DNA analysis .
TTN : I was conducted survey in Hagiang and Cao Bang provinces during two year 2010 and 2011 .
KN : From local government or national museum where Mr. Tao belongs to .
Is an alive individual required for DNA analysis , for species description and depiction , or for something else ?
On Thursday , Scotland 's First Minister and Scottish National Party -LRB- SNP -RRB- leader Alex Salmond set the date September 18 , 2014 , for the country 's referendum on political independence from the rest of the United Kingdom .
The question to be presented at the ballot is : `` Should Scotland be an independent country ? ''
The vote comes from what Salmond describes as a chance `` to build a better country '' .
Salmon urged the Scottish population to seize the opportunity for independence , quoted by ABC as saying , '' -LSB- t -RSB- he choice becomes clearer with each passing day - the opportunity to use our vast resources and talent to build a better country , or to continue with a Westminster system that simply is n't working for Scotland , ''
However , Independence opponent and Scottish Labour leader , Johann Lamont claims the SNP have failed to detail how an independent Scotland would support itself .
Lamont told the The Guardian that Salmond has failed to explain how the new nation would deal with health care and education issues , as well as what its polices would be on tax , pensions and welfare .
For this election only , the voting age of the September referendum has been lowered to 16 .
Polling expert Prof John Curtice told the BBC : `` If you look at the polls in the round , what you discover is , yes , younger people are perhaps a little more likely to be in favour of independence . ''
A male driver has been hospitalised with serious head injuries after the car he was in crashed into the corner of a house in Suffolk in the east of the United Kingdom .
Members of the fire service attended the incident scene , which occurred in the Carlton Colville district of the town of Lowestoft , approximately seven minutes after it was reported to emergency services at approximately 0145 UTC today .
Although three people were inside the house when the car impacted it , none of them were hurt .
However , the driver sustained serious injuries to the head .
The road where the crash happened was temporarily closed while emergency services freed the driver from the red Audi TT .
He was initially hospitalised in the James Paget Hospital in Great Yarmouth .
Structural engineers have been asked to examine the house .
The house has been vacated by its occupants as analysis continues , police reported .
It is not clear if the collision has caused the building to leak gas .
Today -- Monday -- in Page , Australian Capital Territory , ACT Policing recovered a 1.6 metre -LRB- 5 foot 3 inch -RRB- tall stolen fiberglass Utahraptor dinosaur which had been stolen this past Thursday from Canberra 's Gold Creek based National Dinosaur Museum .
According to the police , a 20-year-old man stole the Utahraptor as part of a birthday prank and had planned to return the Utahraptor to the museum later today .
Police described the thief as contrite and apologetic .
The dinosaur was returned by the police to the museum with its tail detached .
The Australian Broadcasting Corporation report it is unclear whether the museum and police plan to pursue charges against the dinosaur thief .
This week , the United States Supreme Court is scheduled to address two cases before them on the issue of same-sex marriage .
The federal Defense of Marriage Act case is scheduled to be heard on Wednesday .
The other case involves California 's Proposition 8 .
A ruling is unlikely to be made until June .
John Eastman , law professor at Chapman University and chairman of National Organization for Marriage , a group that opposes same-sex marriage , believes the eventual ruling will be a close one , with Associate Justice Anthony Kennedy likely to be the key swing vote .
Eastman is quoted by U.S. News and World Report as saying of Kennedy , `` All eyes are on Justice Kennedy and he 's obviously written the two major gay rights decisions in the past decade and a half and that means that people rightly think that he 's kind of open to taking this step , but he has studiously avoided taking that step in prior cases . ''
Other court watchers agree with this sentiment .
In the lead up to the hearings , a number of high profile politicians have expressed their support for same-sex marriage including Democratic Senator Mark Warner of Virginia , Democratic Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri , former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Republican Senator Rob Portman of Ohio .
Earlier this month , 40 United States senators signed a legal brief arguing against the constitutionality of the federal Defense of Marriage Act that was submitted to the Supreme Court .
High visibility companies have also indicated support for legalized same-sex marriage in the United States , including Starbucks where CEO Howard Schultz gave company support at a share-holder meeting last week .
After share-holder Tom Strobhar implied at the meeting that Starbuck 's historical position of supporting same-sex marriage , which included open support of the same-sex marriage legalization efforts in the state of Washington last year , hurt the company 's bottom line , Schultz responded by saying , `` If you feel , respectfully , that you can get a higher return than the 38 % you got last year , it 's a free country .
The company 's position is predicated on respecting diversity , even if it potentially impacts Starbucks earnings .
Goldman Sachs has also supported the push for same-sex marriage arguing that the lack of equality hurts businesses .
Goldman Sachs , Marriott International and Thomson Reuters have all signed a legal brief condemning the federal Defense of Marriage Act .
A Washington Post-ABC News poll published last week showed support for same-sex marriage in the United States was at an all time high at 58 % , an increase of 21 % since 2003 .
A recent Gallup poll showed similar results , with 54 % of Americans supporting federal benefits for gay and lesbian couples , an increase of 27 % since 1996 when the federal Defense of Marriage Act became law .
Last week , a poll published by Reuters/Ipso found 63 % of Americans supported same-sex marriage or civil unions .
Despite this , social conservatives argue that this support may be over-stated by as much as 7 % when voters are asked to voice their opinion on the issue at the ballot box .
Social conservatives also argue that people lie to pollsters to avoid appearing intolerant .
2000 Republican presidential candidate Gary Bauer said on Fox News Sunday , `` I 'm not worried about -LSB- same-sex marriage -RSB- , because the polls are skewed .
Just this past November , four states , very liberal states , voted on this issue and my side lost all four of those votes .
Brian S. Brown , president of the National Organization for Marriage , also argues that misleading polling questions over-count support for same-sex marriage in the United States .
Despite the potential for skewed polling , the four most recent ballot initiatives regarding same-sex marriage in the United States on a state level resulted in citizens voting to support same-sex marriage in Minnesota , Maryland , Washington and Maine .
It also comes at a time when the most recent election cycle in the United States saw opponents of same-sex marriage outspent 3 to 1 .
Last Tuesday , AusAID Australia and the World Bank 's Global Environment Fund -LRB- GEF -RRB- reached an agreement to give the government of Kiribati US$ 5 million -LRB- AU$ 4,779,000 , NZ$ 5,985,000 , $ 3,885,000 -RRB- to install solar panels around the country capital , located on the Tarawa atoll .
According to Business Desk of the Brunei Times , AusAID promised AU$ 3.2 million in funding , while GEF promised US$ 1 million .
The country was the first in the Pacific to make a deal with the World Bank .
The funding was part of a US$ 530 million -LRB- NZ$ 635 million -RRB- package announced at yesterday 's Pacific Energy Summit in Auckland involving New Zealand and the European Union , Australia , the Asian Development Bank , the European Investment Bank , the Japan International Cooperation Agency , the World Bank Group , and the United Arab Emirates .
Also at the summit yesterday , New Zealand 's Foreign Affairs Minister Murray McCully had announced a national commitment of USD$ 54,262,000 -LRB- AU$ 51,861,000 NZ$ 65 million , $ 42,178,000 -RRB- to Pacific region energy solutions , of which US$ 8,348,000 -LRB- AU$ 8 million , NZ$ 10 million , $ 6,483,000 -RRB- would be specifically earmarked for renewable energy and improved energy efficiency in the Cook Islands , Kiribati , Papua New Guinea , Samoa , Tonga , and Tuvalu .
Kiribati is heavily dependent on diesel fuel for most of the energy available on the national power grid , which supplies power to half Kiribati 's population of 110,000 .
In addition , a third of the country 's population lacks access to electricity .
Once installation of the solar panels is complete , they are estimated to reduce diesel consumption by 230,000 liters -LRB- 60,760 gallons -RRB- a year and give access to the electricity to some parts of the population that currently have no electricity .
The European Union already has committed $ 100 million to sustainable energy in the region , with $ 10 million of that coming as a result of an announcement made last week .
In a press release about the news , Kiribati President Anote Tong was quoted as saying , `` Kiribati faces big challenges it is remote , it is at risk from the effects of climate change , and it is vulnerable to economic shocks .
Radio New Zealand International quoted Tong as saying , `` It 's the first time we are doing this .
The European Union 's Fiji-based head of operations for the Pacific region , Renato Mele , supported alternative energy solutions like solar power for the region , but said that solar power had limitations because climate and environmental conditions sometimes meant batteries required to power the panels had a life of only 12 months , compared to other climates where batteries normally last five years .
This created the potential to drive up standard operating costs .
Mele has also noted these additional costs though are still lower than the cost of diesel power .
Yesterday , at 11:00 am local time in Iceland , the National Commissioner of the Icelandic Police declared an `` uncertainty phase '' , the lowest civilian volcanic alert level , for the country 's Hekla stratovolcano which is located on the southern part of island nation .
The warning was intended to aid in preparations of potential evacuations .
Given the uniqueness of the earthquake activity as it applies to this particular volcano , today , the Icelandic Meteorological Office upgraded their aviation alert for the area to Yellow .
At the same time , Police advised against hiking in the area but were not enforcing this .
The United States Geological Survey international earthquake map showed no earthquakes in Iceland in the week prior .
The Icelandic Meteorological Office also reported no earthquake activity in the Hekla area in the past 48 hours .
The significant earthquake activity resulting in the phase change had took place on March 10 on the northeast side of the volcano 's summit caldera .
Dark clouds unrelated to any volcanic activity were reported at the base of the mountain .
The clouds presented the potential for confusion as to whether an actual eruption had taken place .
Hekla last erupted in 2000 , and has a history of exploding roughly every ten years .
Icelandic volcanic activity attracted international attention as a result of an April 2010 explosion of another volcano that had shut down European airspace for several days .
The Director of the National Museum of Australia , Andrew Sayers , has resigned his position effective July 1 in a move that came as a surprise to his colleagues .
Sayers cited distance issues as his wife is currently working full time in Melbourne .
Sayers is quoted in a statement as saying , `` I leave the museum confident that the reputation of the Museum as the home of our national treasures is one of which we can all be proud .
-LSB- ... -RSB- Professionally , I have enjoyed making a contribution to the Museum , yet , as many couples have discovered a ` commuter relationship ' is not ideal . ''
Sayers was contracted for five years , and was only into his third year in the post .
He began his museum career at Art Gallery of New South Wales and Newcastle Region Art Gallery .
Following his resignation , Sayers will retire to live in Melbourne with his wife .
In a letter to Alan Donnelly , chair of the South Shields Constituency Labour Party , David Miliband lists the reasons for his stepping back from the limelight of British politics : `` After the leadership election , I felt I could be most helpful to the party on the front line , in South Shields and around the country , rather than on the front bench in Parliament .
I felt this gave Ed the space and at the same time the support he needed to lead the party without distraction . ''
Ed Miliband praised his brother , saying British politics would be `` a poorer place '' without David : `` Having spoken to him a lot over the past few months , I know how long and hard he thought about this before deciding to take up the offer .
I also know how enthusiastic he is about the potential this job provides . ''
A man , reportedly a postman , has died as the result of a one-vehicle road traffic collision in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland .
Emergency services were alerted to the incident , which occurred on Ford Terrace on the island of Benbecula , at 1139 UTC yesterday .
STV News reported the mail carrier , who has not yet been publicly identified , was conducting his duties at the time of the incident .
According to Hebrides News , the accident occurred when the man was standing outside of the van he was driving ; the vehicle rolled over the man , fatally injuring him .
The Northern Constabulary said the local Road Policing Unit based in the town of Dingwall in the Scottish Highlands has launched an investigation into the incident .
A spokesperson for the Royal Mail said the postal service is cooperating with police as they investigate the incident .
Police do not intend to disclose any further information about the incident until relatives of the deceased have been informed of the incident .
No other vehicles are thought to have been involved ; the Northern Constabulary has not yet said if it is looking for any other persons in relation to the fatality .
Soyuz TMA-08M is the first manned Soyuz spaceflight to follow a new flight plan which allowed the spacecraft to dock with the ISS in a record-breaking time of approximately six hours , or four orbits , rather than the usual two days .
This new flight plan , described as `` a fast track to the International Space Station '' by NASA spokesman Josh Byerly , had been tested successfully prior to Thursday 's launch by three unmanned Progress cargo ships delivering supplies to the station .
The three-member crew of the mission consists of two Russian cosmonauts , Commander Pavel Vinogradov and Flight Engineer Aleksandr Misurkin , and one U.S. astronaut , Flight Engineer Christopher Cassidy .
Aleksandr Misurkin is making his maiden trip into space aboard the mission .
The Soyuz spacecraft docked with the ISS at 2:28 UTC on Friday , about four minutes ahead of schedule and just short of six hours after liftoff .
After docking with the station , the hatches separating the Soyuz and the ISS were opened at 4:35 UTC , after which the new crewmembers were welcomed aboard by the three-man crew currently aboard the outpost , Russian cosmonaut Roman Romanenko , Canadian astronaut Chris Hadfield , and U.S. astronaut Thomas Marshburn .
The combined six-person Expedition 35 space station crew is slated to perform scientific research and prepare for upcoming departures and arrivals of other spacecraft .
The next of these is scheduled for April 15 when Progress M-17M is to undock from the station .
The trio already aboard the ISS -- consisting of Romanenko , Hadfield , and Marshburn -- are to depart and return to Earth aboard Soyuz TMA-07M on May 14 , leaving the Soyuz TMA-08M crew behind .
Soyuz TMA-09M , also using the new flight plan , is scheduled to arrive at the ISS with three new crewmembers two weeks later on May 28 .
Demonstrations took place across the UK over the holiday weekend , echoing the message personally delivered to Iain Duncan Smith at a Capita-sponsored talk last week .
Chants of `` Axe , axe , axe the bedroom tax '' could be clearly heard throughout Edinburgh 's demonstration .
At the end of his minute-long tirade at the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions , Willie Black labelled Duncan Smith a `` ratbag '' ; several people turned up with this printed on their tee shirts .
Wikinews photographed the march from Edinburgh 's St. Andrew 's Square to the Scottish Parliament .
Various estimates put the number in-attendance between 1,200 and 1,600 .
Other protests took place in London , with an estimated 1,000 at Trafalgar Square and Downing street .
Glasgow saw around 2,500 take to the streets .
Those demonstrating equated the package of changes that see benefit rises at a below-inflation 1 % , and housing benefit cut by 14 % for those with one spare room , 25 % if they have two or more spare rooms , with the ` poll tax ' which saw riots in England during Margaret Thatcher 's time as Prime Minister .
The United States economy grew at a 0.4 % annual rate in the last three months of 2012 according to statistics released on Thursday by the United States Department of Commerce -LRB- USDOC -RRB- .
The revised figures are better than 0.1 % previously estimated .
The increased estimate comes after a hike in taxes at the beginning of this year and $ 85 billion being withdrawn from government spending at the beginning of March .
Economists are predicting the first quarter of 2013 -LRB- January -- March -RRB- will have an annual growth rate about 2.5 % .
Mount Stromlo , Canberra -- This Easter weekend , elite mountain bike riders competed in the Australian 24-hour solo championships at Canberra 's Stromlo Forest Park .
Jason English from Port MacQuarie rode 33 laps and won the men 's race .
Liz Smith from Wollongong rode 25 laps and won the women 's race .
Races are won by riding the most laps .
Riders wear lights on their helmets and bicycles during night laps .
The event is a curtain raiser for the WEMBO World Solo 24 hour Mountain Bike Championships , which will be held at Stromlo Forest Park on 12 and 13 October 2013 .
The weekend before , the teams of riders took to the track at the Mont 24 hour race at Canberra 's Kowen forest .
With over 3,000 riders participating , it is now Australia 's largest cycling race .
The team version of the race was favoured by the weekend warriors , but also attracted more than a few elite athletes .
Laps were ridden in relay fashion : each rider handed over the baton -LRB- which looked like a credit card -RRB- to another member of the team after riding one or more laps .
Multiple earthquakes over the Easter weekend around El Hierro Island , one of the Canary Islands , have raised some parts of the island by as much as 11 centimetres -LRB- 4.3 inches -RRB- .
This includes a 4.9 magnitude earthquake Sunday , following 129 quakes below 1.3 magnitude through Saturday .
The majority of quakes making up this seismic event occurred at depths between 11 kilometers -LRB- 6.8 miles -RRB- and 15 kilometers -LRB- 9.3 miles -RRB- , and ranged between 2.0 and 4.5 on the Richter Scale .
VolcanoDiscovery reports this may be a sign magma is rising to the surface , but stuck around 20km deep where the 4.9 quake took place ; these are signals there may be a volcanic eruption in the near future .
The 4.9 magnitude quake occurred roughly 10 kilometers -LRB- 6.2 miles -RRB- off shore of El Hierro Island , the southern-most of the Canary Islands chain .
In response , local authorities closed western roads on the island , and other steps , after raising the alert level on the island to the second-highest civil level .
North Korea 's ruling party yesterday unveiled a plan to sign its right to build a nuclear bomb into its constitution .
South Korea 's President Park Geun-Hye responded by saying that provocations from North Korea would trigger decisive military action as the war-like rhetoric on the peninsula intensifies .
North Korea 's declaration that it is pursuing to enshrine its right to make nuclear weapons in its constitution was coupled with a message that strengthening its economy was a priority .
This is perceived by some experts as an effort by North Korean leader Kim Jong-un to temper the tensions .
`` I believe that we should make a strong and immediate retaliation without any other political considerations if -LRB- the North -RRB- stages any provocation against our people '' , the South Korean president said at a meeting with military officials and Defence Minister Kim Kwan-jin earlier today , while reaffirming she was taking North Korea 's threats very seriously .
The Defence Minister did not rule out pre-emptive strikes against the North 's nuclear and missile installations if need be .
North Korea , whose parliament is scheduled to hold its annual parliamentary session later today , had issued a series of threats over the past months , including a declaration over the weekend that it was entering a `` state of war '' with the South .
The tension escalated following Pyongyang 's suspected ballistic missile test in December and a nuclear test in February .
The United Nations imposed fresh sanctions following these moves , much to the North 's irritation .
The remains of an unmarked grave suspected to be that of King Alfred of England who died in 899 AD were exhumed in order to protect them for security reasons from St Bartholomew 's Church in Winchester .
Prayers were led by The Right Reverend Peter Hancock during the exhumation which was led by archaeologists on March 25 -- 26 due to fears that the bones may be subject to theft .
-LRB- -LRB- Wikinews -RRB- -RRB- Why were the remains exhumed from the unmarked grave ?
NE : This presupposes that this investigation is looking for King Alfred .
Nonetheless , Alfred 's bones were moved twice , before being unearthed by prisoners in the late 18th c. And subsequently possibly falling into the hands of a disreputable antiquarian in the 19th century .
JC : Very difficult to say -- although , as capital of Wessex , Winchester would be the obvious place .
Much would depend on scientific evidence -LRB- see below -RRB- .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Is DNA testing difficult to conduct on bones of such an age ?
The Alfred story comes up close behind that of Richard III -- which does raise the thought of a ` bandwagon . '
Again I must stress that I am not an archaeologist or DNA person but my understanding is that in Richard III 's case procedure centred on comparison between his DNA and that of people who are alive today and who are descended from other members of his family -- including his brother the Duke of Clarence and his niece Elizabeth of York .
I was struck by how many figures of importance today are related to Richard -- in other words they are the sort of people whose family trees are well known .
While I am sure that there are many people related to Alfred , the greater length of time and the dispossession of so many Saxons at the time of the Norman Conquest would mean that present day descendents would be harder to trace with certainty .
In other words I do not say that the DNA method would be impossible but it would face much bigger challenges than in the case of Richard III .
One of the clinching factors with Richard III was that contemporary accounts describe the King as having a humped back -- as did the skeleton .
Barns is not new to political campaigning ; the barrister served as the leader of Australian Republican Movement during the late 1990s and served as a Liberal Party of Australia staffer .
Barns was personally asked by Julian Assange to take the position , following Assange 's own announcement late last year that he would run for a federal Senate seat in Victoria .
John Shipton is already serving as the party 's secretary .
Barns said the WikiLeaks Party 's federal platform will focus on several issues including human rights , freedom of speech , privacy issues , and government transparency .
The Wikileaks Party has not been registered yet with the Australian Electoral Commission as they do not have 500 enrolled electors as of today .
Assange is still based in London in the Ecuadorian Embassy , where he has been living for the last nine months .
Assange would need approximately 15 % of the Victorian vote to win a senate seat .
Cypriot Finance Minister Michael Sarris resigned yesterday due to public discontent with his handling of the negotiations over a bailout from international lenders and a state investigation into the circumstances that pushed the country close to a financial collapse .
According to Cyprus based media organizations , Sarris has been succeeded by the current Labor Minister Haris Georgiades
Sarris attributed his resignation to the probe announced earlier today , admitting that he may also be targeted by judges as they try to find out why the country was forced to seek a bailout .
`` I believe that in order to facilitate the work of -LSB- investigators -RSB- the right thing would be to place my resignation at the disposal of the president of the republic , which I did , '' said Sarris , who was appointed as minister only in February .
Sarris 's resignation came shortly after he signed a $ 10 billion -LRB- US$ 13 billion -RRB- rescue deal with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund that could see depositors with $ 100,000 lose up to 60 % of their savings .
An earlier version of the deal , which called for all Cypriot bank depositors to sacrifice part of their savings , was later scrapped following a wave of popular outrage .
Authorities announced yesterday that last month approximately 687 endangered pig-nosed turtles were seized at the Sorkarno-Hatta International Airport in the Indonesian capital city of Jakarta .
The turtles were reportedly destined for the city of Hong Kong , China .
Teguh Samudro the head of BKIMP , the Indonesian quarantine said yesterday : `` The packages were broken when they arrived at the airport , so we could tell what was inside '' ; `` We do n't know where they were being sent as the address on the package does not exist '' .
He noted the turtles are to be returned shortly to their native Papua habitat .
He went on to say that , `` Violators of the 1992 law on animal , fish and plant quarantines or the 1990 law on biodiversity and ecosystem conservation face up to three years ' imprisonment and fines of up to Rp 150 million -LRB- US$ 15,400 -RRB- . ''
The person who sent the endangered turtles has not yet been identified .
The Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora aims to ensure that international trade of animals and plants a risk of extinction are restricted , the pig-nosed turtle species are listed .
They are at risk of extinction after having been smuggled for many years and the The Jakarta Post reports that 15 centimeter long adult pig-nosed turtles can get up to US$ 2,000 on the black market .
The initial idea plan was to conduct a month long pilot and , if positive , keep the crossing painted in rainbow colors for twelve month period .
However , the Roads and Maritime Services -LRB- RMS -RRB- warned of the potential danger the painted the road could pose for drivers and demanded the road be painted over .
Despite an online petition gathered almost 15,000 signatures to save the rainbow , the Roads Minister Duncan Gay and Premier Barry O'Farrell decided not to meet the requests from the City of Sydney for the road to remain with the colors of rainbow .
A spokeswoman for Gay 's office cited road safety hazard and unsafe behavior as the reason for removal , including people who sat in the road to take pictures .
Alex Greenwich , the local representative from Sydney in the New South Wales state government , had organised the petition earlier and said Gay exaggerated the potential safety hazards , and said that people took pictures during the parade of Mardi Gras , when there was no traffic .
Sydney Lord Mayor Clover Moore also disputed Mr Gay 's claims , citing no safety hazards , `` The audit also shows that generally the risk to the public of having the rainbow crossing is low .
This is bureaucracy gone wild -- the Minister wants to remove the crossing because he does n't like some pictures that people have been taking .
Those pictures are a drop in the ocean compared to the tens of thousands of other pictures of the crossing that have ... promoted Oxford St as one of the best LGBT tourism destinations in the world . ''
The walk is scheduled to be painted over this week and will cost about AU$ 35,000 .
The Senate in Uruguay voted 23 -- 8 on Tuesday to legalise same-sex marriage following approval from the country 's lower house in December .
The proposed law will need to go back to the lower house for consideration of amendments .
Jose Mujica , the country 's president , has said that he will sign it .
As well as legalising marriage for same-sex partners , the bill sets a minimum age for marriage at 16 which will apply to both same-sex and heterosexual marriages .
This represents a change from the current law where the minimum age for boys to get married is 14 , while the minimum age for girls to get married is 12 .
In addition , the legislation will also change the rules on in-vitro fertilisation and adoption .
Uruguay already has civil union legislation , legal same-sex adoption and allows gay people to serve openly in the military .
The introduction of same-sex marriage in Uruguay is opposed by the Roman Catholic Church , but the influence of the Church in Uruguay is limited .
Police said both men were in critical condition after being transported to nearby Calvary Hospital .
According to the University of Canberra and Campus Living Services , who operate the university 's residence halls , neither man attended the university .
Detective Sergeant John Giles from ACT Policing 's Criminal Investigations said the police believe both men overdosed on a synthetic ketamine product , which they likely consumed believing it was ecstasy .
According to Giles , ecstasy is commonly used at nightclubs in Canberra .
Emergency services were first called to the scene at 11:00 am Canberra time ; officials were on site for at least another hour and a half .
ACT Policing secured the area while AFP Forensics investigated .
At this stage , the Australian Federal Police do not believe there were any suspicious circumstances surrounding the incident .
The incident follows a fire alarm going off at 3:20 am Canberra time , and going off again around 7:20 am .
Fire alarm testing has been scheduled for today .
This latest operation by the group , dubbed `` Operation Justice For Rehtaeh '' , led to expression of concern among the members of the RCMP .
In an interview with the National Post , Nova Scotia Justice Minister Ross Landry spoke of the dangers of releasing this crucial information in this ongoing investigation , `` We do n't want another child taking their life because some vigilante group think it 's OK ... maybe it 's a wrong name -- then what would they do to someone ? ''
The 17-year-old Parsons was taken off life support on Sunday following an attempt to take her own life days before .
Her mother erected a Facebook page celebrating the life of her daughter as well as acknowledging the true reasons for her daughters tragic passing , `` Rehtaeh is gone today because of the four boys that thought that raping a 15-year-old girl was okay , and to distribute a photo to ruin her spirit and reputation would be fun . ''
Last Friday , following over two years of lawsuit over failure to participate in general election , Anders Holmdahl attended a High Full Court of Australia hearing with an audio-link from Canberra to Adelaide , South Australia , claiming voting is a right , not a duty , citing the Australian constitution .
However the Justices dismissed the application for leave to appeal against conviction , ruling it had `` no prospect of success '' over a point that the Commonwealth Electoral Act was enacted within power .
After a 20-minute discourse with the lawyer representing the applicant , Justice Kenneth Hayne said , `` An appeal to this Court would enjoy no prospect of success .
Justices Stephen Gageler , Patrick Keane were also present at the hearing and participated in the verbal discourse , also enquiring the lawyer about their reasoning but not specifying reasons other than what Hayne J said .
Wikinews contacted both Anders Holmdahl and the High Court and confirmed there was no other documentation of reasons behind the judgment .
The standard High Court procedures involve hearing each matter by a single Justice and only escalating it after a special leave to appeal is granted .
The appeal also had exhausted lower means of appeal before being lodged in High Court ; the Supreme Court of South Australia had dismissed it on September 24 , 2012 .
It cited that the Australian Constitution allows each state to enact their own election laws , and the Federal Parliament has the power to make laws `` with respect to ... matters in respect of which this Constitution makes provision until the Parliament otherwise provides '' .
The Court concluded that the Commonwealth Electoral Act was legislation enacted within power .
Prior to escalation to the Supreme Full Court of South Australia , in May 2012 , a single Justice Gray had forwarded the matter for consideration of Full Court -LRB- three Judges -RRB- at his discretion .
This happened several months after a Magistrate had recorded the conviction following a trial in February 2012 .
Anders Holmdahl originally pleaded not guilty during his first Magistrates court appearance in December 2011 regarding the August 21 , 2010 election .
The electoral system of Australia requires all citizens to enroll .
At the time of the election , Anders Holmdahl was enrolled as an elector on the Commonwealth Electoral Roll for the Division of Hindmarsh .
Anders Holmdahl had decided to take the case before the United Nations Human Rights Council .
The BBC has announced it will not play `` Ding-Dong !
The song has become the third most downloaded single of the week , following the death of former United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher .
The song is featured in the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz .
Conservative MP John Whittingdale , Chairman of the House of Commons Culture , Media and Sport Select Committee welcomed the BBC 's decision , acknowledging `` this was always going to be a very difficult decision for the BBC -LSB- ... -RSB- I do n't think it would have been right to have allowed the chart show to have been hijacked for political purposes and had they played the whole song that would have been the consequence .
Mrs Thatcher 's funeral is scheduled for St.Paul 's Cathedral on Wednesday .
It is to be attended by leading figures from the worlds of politics and entertainment , as well as several international figures , including former Australian Prime Minister John Howard and inventor of the World Wide Web Sir Tim Berners-Lee .
Earlier today , multiple explosions have occurred in Boston resulting in two confirmed deaths and hundreds injured at Copley Square .
Two explosions within seconds of each other tore through the finish line at the Boston Marathon , approximately four hours after the start of the men 's race .
Boston Herald reporter and eyewitness Chris Cassidy said it appeared that the first of the two blasts originated from trash cans along the sidewalk which was heavily populated with marathon spectators .
A third explosion also occurred at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum , however the Boston Police Department are not reporting any casualties at that scene .
Area police do not believe the two events are related .
That one was in front of Abe and Louie 's , '' said the Herald 's Cassidy who was participating in the event at the time .
Ed Davis from the Boston police informed the media that persons wishing to contact persons at the scene should phone 617-635-4500 .
On April 10 Senator Pat Toomey , accompanying Senator Joe Manchin in announcing the amendment , said it aimed to make `` it more difficult for criminals and mentally ill people to obtain guns '' .
The amendment would expand checks to sales online and at gun shows .
The bill received only 54 of the required 60 votes to proceed , despite strong public support for tighter gun control in the wake of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting last year .
Gun rights groups have campaigned strongly against the vote , claiming that the measures would violate constitutional rights , and targeting individual Senators with mocking material appearing online .
Rescue personnel have found the body of a 46 year-old man , who drowned in Lake Palestine , in northeast Texas , while fishing on Sunday .
Rescue crews began searching the lake for a missing person on Sunday evening around 8:30 pm -LRB- local time -RRB- .
A police official told reporters the man was found just before midnight on Sunday evening .
Reports indicate Perkins was not wearing a life vest , although the woman was .
Onlookers stated it was unclear if the boat overturned or if the man simply fell from the boat .
Witnesses reported the boat was about 300 yards from the shore when the man fell into the water .
Officials used a sonar device to locate Perkins ' body .
His remains were found along the bottom of the lake at 11:53 pm .
A gunman opened fire at a hunting shop in the Russian city of Belgorod yesterday , leaving six people dead .
Authorities said the man , believed to have used a hunting rifle , killed three salespeople and two bystanders , and injured another woman who died of head wounds shortly after the incident .
The man left the scene in a BMW , later abandoning the vehicle .
Police yesterday requested Belgorod residents stay inside their homes .
Local authorities have said the search involves around 1200 police ; InSerbia reports a team of 50 SWAT troops have also been dispatched to assist with the manhunt .
Yesterday , the Chicago Bears selected Washington State University 's Marquess Wilson as a seventh-round pick in the National Football League -LRB- NFL -RRB- Draft .
Wilson comes to the Bears organization following a tumultuous final season of university football .
He quit his team after nine games following abuse accusations he made against Washington State 's head coach Mike Leach .
In talking with the Chicago Tribune , he said `` I feel like I could have handled it a little better but like I said I am just moving forward -LSB- ... -RSB- I am excited about the opportunity I have at hand . ''
Chicago Bears head coach Marc Trestman said regarding Wilson 's selection , `` I would consider it a young guy making a very , very small mistake that put him in a position that got him in trouble .
Our kids have made mistakes along the way .
He 's come to a locker room where we have players and coaches that will set him straight right from the beginning and get him going the right direction .
Sunday , the NFL 's Seattle Seahawks drafted Brisbane , Australia native nose tackle Jesse Williams in the fifth round of the NFL Draft .
Going into the draft , there were some expectations by the Brisbane Times and other media outlets that Williams might be selected in the first round .
Injuries , which resulted in Williams being unable to participate fully in the NFL Combine , likely were reasons why he was not selected higher .
Williams ' youth sporting career reflected this , with Williams playing rugby union until he was 15 years old at which time he switched codes and joined the local gridiron team , the Bayside Ravens .
A year later , his playing ability earned him a scholarship offer from the University of Hawaii .
Both seasons , his Crimson Tide team won the national championship .
Earlier today in front of the office of Italy 's prime minister in Rome , shots were fired .
According to Reuters , a witness reported around eight shots fired .
This happened the same day the new Italian government is being sworn in .
Reuters is also reporting at least two policemen were shot .
The process of selecting a new government took two months , with Democratic Party member Enrico Letta becoming the Prime Minister today .
The Democratic Party joined with former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi 's People of Freedom Party to form a coalition government .
The blast occurred just before 10am local time in a building on Divadelní Street .
Spokesman for local authorities Tomas Hulan says it is uncertain what caused the detonation but a natural gas leak is suspected .
The blast shattered windows of buildings in the area , including the National Theatre .
Police have sealed off the area and are currently searching for people they believe may be trapped beneath the rubble .
President Obama addressed a news conference at the White House on Tuesday saying he would have a team of officials review the issue before again appealing to Congress to close the prison holding `` terror '' suspects in Cuba .
`` I think it is critical for us to understand that Guantanamo is not necessary to keep America safe , '' he said .
These remarks were made after 40 US Navy medical staff were sent to the facility to deal with the growing hunger strike that began on February 6 this year , where twenty one inmates are now being force fed ; five of those are in hospital .
`` I do n't want these individuals to die , '' President Obama said .
Calls by the Center for Constitutional Rights however , have called for President Obama to transfer men from the facility now ; a power he has over Congress .
`` He should use the certification/waiver process created by Congress to transfer detainees , starting with the 86 men who have been cleared for release , '' the New York-based group said .
The award had been criticized in the past for its exclusion of women on the short list , with no women appearing on it in 2009 and 2011 .
This year 's authors on the short list include Romy Ash for Floundering , Michelle de Kretser for Questions of Travel , Annah Faulkner for The Beloved , Drusilla Modjeska for The Mountain , and Carrie Tiffany for Mateship with Birds .
The winner gets a cash prize of AU$ 60,000 .
Judges said the shortlist selection was based on the quality of the literature , with gender not playing a role in their decision processes .
Richard Neville , a librarian at the State Library of New South Wales and judge , is quoted by the Sydney Morning Herald saying , `` People will probably think this is a riposte to the Stella Prize , -LSB- . . -RSB-
But I 've judged this for four years , including the infamous year of the ` sausage fest ' , and we always try to view the books as literature .
The chair of the Australia Council 's Literature Board Sophie Cunningham played an integral role in creating the Stella Prize , modeled after the United Kingdom 's Orange Prize .
Ms Sert 's womb transplant came after a first attempt at the same procedure in 2000 on a patient in Saudi Arabia .
The womb was from a living donor , however doctors had to remove the transplant due to heavy clotting , 99 days after transplantation .
However , after Ms Sert 's transplant surgery in 2011 , she began to menstruate -- an indication of a working womb .
Ms Sert 's doctors in Antalya , Turkey monitored the long-term success of the transplant for 18 months before in vitro fertilisation .
Despite no uterus , Ms Sert did produce egg cells .
This March , doctors fertilised one of these eggs , and placed the resulting embryo in Ms Sert 's functioning transplanted womb .
Since Ms Sert 's transplant , two women received mother-to-daughter womb transplants at the University of Gothenburg in Sweden last September , the first such mother-to-daughter transplants , reportedly without complications .
Ms Sert is the first womb-transplant recipient to become pregnant .
In honour of Star Wars Day , the skaters were introduced wearing Jedi-style hooded cloaks and carrying light sabres .
The sport has become very popular , and the bout was sold out .
Nine new skaters have joined the four Canberra teams this year , and another fifteen are in training for their debut next year .
The bout got off to a fast start with a power jam enabling Short Stop to run up thirty points .
This helped the Black and Blue Belles skate to a lead of almost 100 points by half time .
An aggressive defence allowed the Black and Blue Belles to add points to their score line .
The Brindabelters met the Red Bellied Black Hearts on March 23 in a close contest .
The Women 's Flat Track Derby Association changed the rules earlier in the year .
The dancers were joined on the poles by Short Stop , who is also in the running for Miss Pole this year , joined in , still wearing skates .
Lawyers representing Haitian cholera victims warned the United Nations -LRB- UN -RRB- on May 7 , if they do not admit liability for the spread of cholera in 2010 , they 'll be sued .
Lawyers demand the UN apologize to and compensate the victims and improve sanitation efforts .
Lawyers claim the UN is breaking international law by failing to apologize or provide remuneration to the victims .
They 're seeking a minimum of USD$ 100,000 each for families of the deceased and $ 50,000 for each survivor .
So far , over 8,000 people have died and thousands more have been infected with the disease .
UN peacekeepers , whom arrived in Haiti after the 2010 earthquake , are being blamed for the spread of the disease which started near the troop 's encampment .
According to the lawsuit , waste from the UN camp was not properly sanitized , causing bacteria to enter the tributary of the Artibonite River , one of Haiti 's largest .
Prior to the arrival of troops , Haiti had not encountered problems related to the disease since the 1800s .
The Haitian Institute for Justice and Democracy has referenced independent studies that suggest the Nepalese UN peacekeeping battalion unknowingly brought the disease to Haiti .
Danielle Lantagne , a UN expert on the disease , stated the outbreak was likely caused by the peacekeepers .
The UN continues to deny any responsibility for the cholera outbreak and claims it is immune from further legal proceedings .
Nearly 8,000 people have vowed to join the lawsuit .
Falconer had previously chaired the Commission on Assisted Dying , an independent inquiry supported by the think tank Demos , that recommended that those with less than a year to live with a terminal illness ought to be able to request assistance to end their lives .
Dignity in Dying , a campaign group for legalisation of assisted dying , is supporting the bill .
The bill 's provisions would apply to those over 18 with a diagnosed terminal illness and access to lethal drugs would require demonstration of mental competence , independent assessment by two doctors , and being informed of other treatment and end-of-life options .
The bill would not provide any new legal options for those with permanent but non-terminal illnesses like locked-in syndrome sufferer Tony Nicklinson , who brought a case through the English courts to demand a right to assisted dying .
Nor would it help Paul Lamb , a paralysed man in Leeds who is continuing Nicklinson 's case .
Police authorities in Longview , Texas were embroiled in a standoff with an armed suspect for several hours yesterday .
Late in the day , police -- according to police reports -- fired on and killed Candace Jackson , 38 , as she exited the house and fired upon officers nearby .
The incident happened in a residential area near the 2000 block of Eden Drive .
Early in the standoff , a police spokesperson told reporters the individual had possession of several weapons .
Eye witnesses report the suspect being taken away from the scene via ambulance .
SWAT officers were dispatched to the scene , and many neighborhood residents were evacuated with the help of an armored police vehicle , manned by a sniper .
Some residents who lived nearby gathered at a local convenience store until authorities would allow them to return .
News video from the scene showed numerous police vehicles including the armored vehicle .
Some school buses carrying children who live in the area of the standoff were rerouted back to school , and parents were notified to pick up their children at the campuses .
One man told reporters that his wife and child hid in a closet when they heard gunshots in the vicinity of their home .
Leader 's death , at a retirement community he and his wife founded in 1985 , comes after the former governor suffered a short illness .
The community 's spokeswoman , Kelly S. Kuntz , announced Leader 's death .
Leader was born in York County , Pennsylvania in 1918 .
After graduating from the University of Pennsylvania in 1939 , he joined his father 's poultry business .
Shortly thereafter , in World War II , Leader served as an ensign in the U.S. Navy .
After serving in the State Senate for four years , Leader , a Democrat , was elected Governor of Pennsylvania in the 1954 election .
Current Pennsylvania Governor Tom Corbett mandated state flags be flown at half staff until the evening of Leader 's burial .
Corbett also praised Leader , describing him as someone who `` defied political labels and conventional thinking in his tireless work for Pennsylvania and its people . ''
Caracas , Venezuela -- The fifth edition of the Expo Gastronomía food event finished its run yesterday in Caracas at the Plaza Francia in Altamira .
It was the first time the event was held at this particular location .
Starting on Thursday , it was the first edition of the event to be held in 2013 , and was organized by Carlos Garcia and Yolanda Martin .
In its fifth version , the exhibition organizers estimated to receive between 10,000 and 13,000 people to the event , which had nine pavilions representing eight countries around the world .
The exhibitors were divided into four categories : typical food of the country they represent , handicrafts , gastronomy -LRB- comprised of cooking books and products , and metalwork -LRB- -LRB- es -RRB- -RRB- es : Orfebrería : orfebrería -RRB- , and hotel businesses and tourism .
The event was sponsored by Coca-Cola , La Granja , Oroweat , G2000 Events , CGYM Group , and the Chacao Mayor 's Office .
In addition , the food company Cosecha San José participated as one of the exhibitors .
According to organizers , the sixth edition of the event is planned for later this year .
The festival first took place on April 2011 , with a attendance of around 3,000 people .
The film faced a suspension order by the importer on April 11 .
China has a strict policy on censoring films , for sex , violence , and political content .
Australian Treasurer Wayne Swan has today handed down his last budget before the 2013 Federal election .
He announced two financial years of deficits before the budget returned to surplus in 2016/2017 .
`` Because of our deep commitment to jobs and growth , we have taken the responsible course to delay the return to surplus , and due to a savage hit to tax receipts , there will be a deficit of $ 18 billion in 2013/14 '' .
People earning the Newstart Allowance can now earn more from paid employment before there payments from the government are cut .
Mr Swan announced the so called `` Baby Bonus '' was to be merged into the Family Tax Benefit Part A.
`` Family Payment system reshuffle leaves poorest worse off ! ''
The United States White House released roughly a hundred pages of emails on Wednesday related to the September 11 , 2012 attack on the United States diplomatic post in Benghazi , Libya .
The assault killed four US personnel , including US Ambassador to Libya Christopher Stevens .
The documents show conversations the administration had in preparing to discuss the attacks publicly .
The emails show conversations between the White House , the US State Department , and the Central Intelligence Agency -LRB- CIA -RRB- over what the government should say about the attack .
They show the CIA director at the time , David Petraeus , disagreed with the choice of information delivered by United Nations Ambassador Susan Rice on September 16 , 2012 during appearances on Sunday talk shows because he wanted to see more detail on the attack released , `` No mention of the cable to Cairo , either ?
Along with the emails was a handwritten document made by Petraeus 's deputy , Mike Morell , after a meeting at the White House .
It appears that Morell eliminated references to al-Qaeda , Libya-based Islamic extremists , and a warning to the Cairo embassy about a potential demonstration by jihadists lead by the brother of al-Qaeda leader Ayman al Zawahiri .
While some talking points of the demonstration remained intact on the document , any mentioning of Islamic extremists were deleted at a deputies meeting at the White House the next day .
An email by then-State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland also expressed reservations about the disclosure of information about the attacks because of the opportunity it would give congressional Republicans means to undermine the White House .
The email , sent by Nuland on September 14 at 7.39 pm to the White House , State Department and CIA , stated `` The line of ` knowing ' there were extremists among the demonstrators will come back to us at podium '' .
A kangaroo injured Australian politician Shane Rattenbury in the Australian capital , Canberra , on Thursday .
Mr. Rattenbury was taking a morning jog in the Canberra suburb of Ainslie when the kangaroo surprised him , and in the ensuing confrontation , Mr. Rattenbury was scratched several times on the leg .
Neither the kangaroo nor Mr. Rattenbury saw each other until they were close , when they both were surprised by each other .
The kangaroo , which had been behind a hedge , then started hopping around and Rattenbury ducked for cover .
He was left lying in the street while another pedestrian went to his assistance .
He was driven home and visited a hospital , receiving a tetanus shot .
He attended parliament later that day , where his colleagues made kangaroo jokes about him .
There are many kangaroos living in wildlife reserves around the Australian capital , which often enter suburban areas .
The attack follows previous incidents in 2009 when a kangaroo smashed inside a Canberra home , and in 2010 when a kangaroo knocked a jogger unconscious in nearby Mount Ainslie .
Kangaroo culls in the Australian capital have been held annually for several years , which have drawn protests .
Kangaroo management in Canberra was the subject of a television documentary in 2011 called Kangaroo Mob .
In a report released yesterday by the Australian Crime Commission titled `` Illicit Drug Data Report 2011 -- 12 '' , the Australian Capital Territory -LRB- ACT -RRB- and the Northern Territory have the highest price of cocaine found in Australia 's states and territories .
1 gram costs AU$ 500 in the Northern Territory and runs between AU$ 300 and 500 in the ACT .
This compares to AU$ 450 in Victoria , AU$ 250 to 400 in New South Wales , AU$ 300 to AU$ 400 in Queensland , and AU$ 350 in Tasmania .
The report -- the commission 's tenth annual report of Australian illicit drug data -- also notes a ten-year 580 % increase in performance and image enhancing drugs detected at the national border by Australian Customs and Border Protection Service officials .
Syrian rebels have threatened retaliation against the Hezbollah group for sending fighters to assist Syrian President Bashar al-Assad , who is fighting to end a revolt against his rule .
The revolt started more than two years ago , and has killed 80,000 people , leaving 1.5 million refugees .
Nasrallah 's speech confirmed the group are directly involved in Syria 's war , and pledged they would protect Lebanon 's borders from the control of rebels .
He called sending troops outside Lebanon to protect the country `` a completely new phase '' for Hezbollah .
In the Syrian border town of Qusayr , government and Hezbollah forces continue a seven-day battle to expel Syrian rebels from the town .
Reportedly 40 or more people were killed there yesterday , including a number of Hezbollah fighters .
The authorities used roadblocks to isolate this Chinese village from the rest of the world , in order to prevent Catholic pilgrims from attending the yearly Virgin Mary parade .
The village itself is monitored by security officials .
Red banners urge the citizens to maintain order .
Donglü lies only 100 miles from Beijing .
According to local parishioners , a Virgin Mary apparition took place here in 1900 .
In 1995 , more than 30 thousand pilgrims reportedly witnessed an apparition of Mary prompting the Chinese government to use thousands of troops to isolate the village for the whole May .
Since then , this has became a regular image of Donglü in May .
The wedding was the first to occur since the same-sex marriage law was adopted on May 18 .
On Sunday , tensions were high in Paris when opponents of same-sex marriage staged demonstrations throughout the city .
The French police confirmed that they arrested nearly 100 protesters on the esplanade around the Les Invalides monument in Paris .
Police resorted to using tear gas to subdue the crowds and most arrests occurred against civilians for refusing to disperse , occupying private property , and possession of weapons .
Over 150,000 people protested in opposition to the law that was passed last month legalising marriage between gay and lesbian couples .
Over 4,500 police officers were on duty to provide security for the event , where activists waved pink and blue flags .
A dozen far-right rivals to the ruling Socialist Party hung a banner over their headquarters campaigning for current President Francois Hollande to resign .
Tensions also increased after right-wing historian and writer Dominique Venner , 78 , committed suicide by shooting himself inside the Notre Dame Cathedral last week .
His suicide was seen as a political protest against same-sex marriage and a note left on the altar before his death calling France to return to their Christian origins .
Marchers on Sunday believe the `` marriage for all '' act will have damaging consequences as it may open pathways for same-sex couples to adopt children .
Many hoped the demonstrations would stop the Socialist government implementing laws that may allow assisted procreation and the use of surrogates for gay couples .
Support for same-sex marriage however still remains widespread .
A survey published on Sunday showed 53 percent of French citizens polled support adoption of the marriage law and 72 percent called for protests to cease .
Last month , France was the fourteenth country in the world , and the ninth within the EU to legalise same-sex marriage .
France joins countries including Canada , New Zealand , Sweden , Denmark , and Uruguay , and twelve US states , that have legalised same-sex marriage .
The adult female was found with blood preserved still intact in ice cavities .
When palaeontologists excavated the animal , blood flowed from the space below the animal 's abdomen .
This has led scientists to believe mammoth blood may contain some cryoprotectant , making it resistant to freezing .
Scientists are currently discussing the possibility of resurrecting extinct animals from their DNA .
Along with blood samples taken from the site , scientists also discovered well-preserved muscle tissue described as the color of fresh red meat .
The scientists hypothesise the mammoth had fallen into a swamp or water , where she was trapped and eventually died .
The remains are to be transported to Yakutsk and tested to ensure there are no dangerous diseases present .
A High Court jury in Glasgow , Scotland yesterday found two men guilty of the murder of Liam Aitchison .
22-year-old males Jonathan MacKinnon and Stefan Millar reportedly committed the murder on November 23 , 2011 , inside an abandoned building in the village of Steinish on the Outer Hebrides island of Lewis .
Outside the court , Aitchison 's father Norrie said the guilty verdicts would `` finally allow Liam to rest in peace and bring his family some closure . ''
Sentence is scheduled to be passed on the convicted at the High Court in Edinburgh on June 28 .
Liam Aitchison , who originally resided in Lochboisdale on the island of South Uist , moved up to Stornoway in Lewis and began working as a fisherman alongside MacKinnon and Millar after developing a social relationship with them .
MacKinnon and Millar were both charged with Aitchison 's murder in December 2011 .
Having pleaded not guilty to the charges brought against them , the court trial for the two suspects started approximately one month ago .
The court was told of how Aitchison and Millar were listening to music and drinking alongside MacKinnon in his residence on November 22 , 2011 .
As `` a joke '' , MacKinnon punched Aitchison during this visit .
Upon receiving noise complaints from MacKinnon 's mother , the three walked from the house .
The court was told MacKinnon commenced fighting with Aitchison after a bottle of aftershave he had apparently stolen from MacKinnon dropped out of his pocket .
Prior to the murder , MacKinnon had stolen a meat cleaver from a boat he was working on and had been keeping it in his bedroom , the court was also told .
Aitchison 's death was caused by him being stabbed twenty times , as well as being hit with a bottle and stomped on his head .
After he was killed , some items of clothing he was wearing , that he had borrowed from MacKinnon , were removed from his body ; no trace of the items of clothing have been discovered since .
Police have yet to recover any murder weapons .
The prosecuting side , lead by Iain McSporran , believed Aitchison would have been murdered within a 90 minute period on November 23 , 2011 , during a `` communication silence '' in which neither of the accused made use of their mobile phones .
No blood stains were discovered on the clothing of the suspects , although blood stains discovered at the scene of the murder matched MacKinnon 's DNA .
However , the court was also told that MacKinnon had previously cut his hand in the abandoned building several years prior and that the blood stains could not be dated .
A key piece of evidence in the trial came from Dominic Long , who recalled how Millar boasted about the murder while conversing with him in a jail .
Frances McMenamin , QC for Millar , subsequently claimed Long had exaggerated in his recount and was an unreliable witness as he suffered from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder .
During closing speeches to the jury , prosecutor Iain McSporran said he believed the two accused were `` laying a false trail '' and had `` linked their fates together '' because of their conspiracy , while defence QC Frances McMenamin said the jury should not have been looking for `` someone to blame '' for Aitchison 's death .
As the jury gave its guilty verdict , a shout from Aitchison 's family could be heard , calling the defendants a `` pair of monsters '' .
Speaking outside the court , Norrie Aitchison said his son `` fought to defend himself but he did n't stand a chance against the violence he came against that night . ''
After calling the experience of this murder case one which `` no family should have to endure '' , Aitchison said of the convicted : `` The cowards who robbed our Liam of his life and his future should never be able to see the outside of a prison ever again . ''
Liam `` had his whole life in front of him '' , said Detective Inspector Andy Logan , who was the senior investigator of his murder .
The Detective Inspector called the murder case `` a very rare occurrence in what is normally one of the safest places in Scotland '' .
The crime rate in the Outer Hebrides is amongst the lowest for any region in the United Kingdom ; the last murder enquiry to take place on the islands was in 1968 .
Caloundra , Queensland -- Wikinews attended a roller derby event at the Caloundra Indoor Stadium on Australia 's Sunshine Coast on Saturday .
The event , entitled Winter Whackdown , featured the hosting association -- the Coastal Assassins Roller Derby -LRB- CARD -RRB- -- fielding two teams , the Toowoomba Range Renegades and the Brisbane City Rollers Punk Blockers .
The opening bout between the CARD Ace Invaders and the Toowoomba Range Renegades started around 5:15 pm local time -LRB- 0715 UTC -RRB- .
The Punk Blockers won 215 points to 127 .
The court was told of how Kearins had got into an argument with McGuire after consuming what judge Lady Scott called a `` staggering amount of alcohol '' and diazepam .
McGuire , who had also been consuming alcohol and drugs at the time , attacked Kearins during the argument .
`` It was Mr McGuire who started the fight and you were subjected to a quite serious assault , '' the judge said .
During the fight , Kearins took hold of a knife from the kitchen of the Shettleston Road flat and stabbed McGuire through his heart , causing him to collapse .
The judge commented on how Kearins `` expressed remorse at the scene '' .
The court was told that as McGuire was dying of his injuries , Kearins said : `` Do n't die .
The court was told of how Kearins had experienced a problematic childhood in which he had commenced consuming cannabis when he was aged nine and had been committing offences as young as twelve .
Last Thursday , the French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies -LRB- INSEE -RRB- announced the French job market continued to struggle as unemployment rose to 10.8 % , the country 's highest recorded unemployment rate since 1998 .
The 0.3 % rise in the first quarter of 2013 had increased doubt around French President François Hollande 's promise to reverse the trend by the end of 2013 .
According to INSEE data this had been recorded to be the 24th uninterrupted month of unemployment increases , leaving 3.25 million people jobless .
France 's economy was predicted to marginally retract overall this year and had experienced a minor recession this quarter due to deteriorating economic activity .
The news came as the European Central Bank -LRB- ECB -RRB- planned to meet to discuss interest rates .
It was assumed that the ECB would reveal plans to encourage lending in the eurozone , a significant outcome for small and medium sized business , who employed around three quarters of the eurozone .
The International Monetary Fund -LRB- IMF -RRB- had advised France that they may fall behind surrounding European economies if they do not take action and introduce new economic reforms .
The IMF has suggested a decrease in labour costs and stopping tax increases could help to improve the country 's economic competitiveness and increase growth .
Two Australian Paralympic wheelchair basketball players , Shelley Chaplin and Leanne Del Toso , are cycling around Fiji to raise money for people in Fiji with disabilities .
They hope to cover the route , which is roughly 500 kilometers -LRB- 300 miles -RRB- long , in just ten days .
Del Toso suffered muscle deterioration in her legs and hands due to a degenerative neurological condition when she was 19 , and rides her bike with the aid of orthotics .
Chaplin was born a paraplegic , and is using a handcycle .
Both also played for Victoria in Round One of the Australia Women 's Wheelchair Basketball League -LRB- WNWBL -RRB- competition last weekend .
Victoria won all four of its games .
A two-vehicle road traffic accident in County Donegal in Ireland has left one person dead and injured two others .
The accident occurred when a camper van collided with an oncoming car on the N15 road between the towns of Ballybofey and Donegal at approximately 1540 BST -LRB- 1440 UTC -RRB- on Monday .
The female passenger he was travelling in the car with , thought to be the wife of the man , was taken to the same hospital after suffering serious injuries .
The man and woman in the camper van were transported to Sligo Regional Hospital .
The condition of the two occupants is not clear , although the woman in the vehicle reportedly injured her leg in the accident .
Judge Lord Kinclaven yesterday ordered both MacKinnon and Millar to serve at least eighteen years imprisonment before becoming eligible to apply for parole .
Lord Kinclaven told MacKinnon and Millar they had committed `` the brutal murder of a young man who was only 16 years of age '' .
The two convicted reportedly murdered Aitchison on November 23 , 2011 , inside an abandoned building in Steinish , a village located on the island of Lewis .
Aitchison , who had originally resided in Lochboisdale on the island of South Uist , moved up to Stornoway in Lewis and began working as a fisherman alongside MacKinnon and Millar , developing a social relationship with them .
MacKinnon and Millar pled not guilty to the charges of murder , which police had charged them with in December 2011 .
Judge Lord Kinclaven presided over the subsequent court trial , which started approximately two months ago .
Aitchison and Millar were listening to music and drinking alongside MacKinnon in his residence on November 22 , 2011 and MacKinnon punched Aitchison as `` a joke '' during this visit , the court was told .
The three walked from the house upon receiving noise complaints from MacKinnon 's mother .
The court was told MacKinnon commenced fighting with Aitchison when a bottle of aftershave he had apparently stolen from MacKinnon dropped from his pocket .
Aitchison died when he was stabbed twenty times , as well as being hit with a bottle and stomped on his head .
Some items of clothing he was wearing , that he had borrowed from MacKinnon , were removed from his body following the killing .
There were no reports during the trial of any trace of the items of clothing being discovered , nor did police recover any murder weapons .
Aitchison was likely murdered within a 90 minute period on November 23 , 2011 , during a `` communication silence '' in which neither of the accused made use of their mobile phones , the prosecution believed .
Blood stains were not discovered on the clothing of the suspects , although blood stains discovered at the scene of the murder matched MacKinnon 's DNA .
However , the court was also told MacKinnon had previously cut his hand in the abandoned building several years prior and the blood stains could not be dated .
Aitchison 's father Norrie said following the guilty verdicts MacKinnon and Millar were given would `` finally allow Liam to rest in peace and bring his family some closure . ''
He called this murder case one which `` no family should have to endure '' , additionally commenting of the convicted : `` The cowards who robbed our Liam of his life and his future should never be able to see the outside of a prison ever again . ''
Following the sentencing , Claire Aitchison , Liam Aitchison 's step-mother , said : `` We are happy that justice has been done and that these two brutal murderers will spend a long time in prison . ''
Claire and her husband Norrie had criticised the Scottish legal system after the guilty verdicts were given for the way it could allow murder suspects to be granted bail after MacKinnon and Millar were both granted bail in February 2012 and December 2011 respectively .
`` We want to head up a campaign to keep anyone that is charged with murder on remand until proven innocent or guilty , '' Norrie Aitchison said .
In a statement , Detective Inspector Andy Logan , the senior investigator of Aitchison 's murder , said the crime had `` caused considerable distress in such a small community . ''
He also said `` Liam 's family have also had to cope with the loss Liam in the most tragic of circumstances and hopefully -LSB- these -RSB- sentences will help to reassure the community and help the family in coming to terms with their terrible loss . ''
North of Scotland procurator fiscal Liam Murphy said Aitchison 's murder `` caused shock and concern in this small community of Lewis and across Scotland '' but stressed there was a low murder rate in this region .
`` I hope that these murder convictions reassure those communities that when we do have such crimes , justice will be done , '' he added .
Wikinews reached out earlier this week to former U.S. Congressman and 2014 Colorado gubernatorial candidate Tom Tancredo for his response to the secessionist proposal of eight Northern Colorado counties .
Tancredo maintains he is better suited to repair the geopolitical gulf at the root of the proposal than Governor John Hickenlooper .
The secession idea came about last week as the commissioners from the northeastern Colorado counties of Weld , Morgan , Logan , Sedgwick , Phillips , Washington , Yuma , and Kit Carson expressed interest in withdrawing from Colorado due to differences with the state government over gun control and the perceived overregulation of agriculture and the oil and gas industries .
The commissioners proposed the formation of a new state named , `` North Colorado '' .
Hickenlooper , a Democrat , was elected governor in 2010 over Tancredo , the then-Constitution Party gubernatorial candidate .
Tancredo has since switched back to the Republican Party , under which he served as Congressman for Colorado 's 6th congressional district from 1999 to 2009 .
Tancredo officially announced his 2014 candidacy last month .
According to Tancredo , Hickenlooper 's policies impose barriers on rural Coloradans that he plans to remove if elected governor .
In addition , Tancredo feels he can better address the rural-urban rift because , `` I do not believe that rural Coloradans are , as Governor Hickenlooper has called them , ` backward thinkers ' . ''
The Duke of Edinburgh , the husband of the current British monarch , today departed from the London Clinic , located in the centre of the British capital , after eleven days .
Prince Philip , who is aged 92 , was hospitalised on June 6 to be given exploratory surgery on his abdomen .
According to the BBC , it was thought the Prince would remain in hospital for two weeks .
The abdominal surgery was pre-planned , Buckingham Palace previously reported , although the reasons why this surgery was arranged have not been publicised .
The Duke of Edinburgh missed numerous royal occasions while he was in the private building , including the Trooping the Colour on June 15 to celebrate the Queen 's Official Birthday .
As he was staying in the Clinic , over a thousand cards were sent to the Duke .
Also , members of the British Royal Family , including Charles , Prince of Wales ; Prince Edward , Earl of Wessex ; Prince William , Duke of Cambridge ; Prince Harry of Wales ; and his wife , Elizabeth II , visited him .
A Buckingham Palace statement said the Duke was in `` good condition and good spirits '' , adding that he would take a two month time period to recover .
`` The Duke has expressed his thanks and appreciation to medical staff at the London Clinic and the many members of the public who have sent good wishes '' , the statement added .
ITV News Royal Correspondent Tim Ewart commented , `` for a man of 92 , who spent 11 nights in hospital , the Duke looked extraordinarily fit . ''
Commissioner Robert Lafrenière said the alleged illegal acts occurred between 2006 and 2011 and relate to two real-estate projects in the Côte des Neiges-Notre Dame de Grâce borough .
The CBC indicated one of these projects was the borough 's new 15 million dollar sports complex .
Applebaum is now one of several Québec mayors who have been accused of corruption in the past few years , including the previous Montreal mayor Gérald Tremblay and Laval Mayor Gilles Vaillancourt .
Two bodies have been discovered in Scapa Flow in Scotland 's Orkney Islands , 40 metres away from the wreckage of the SMS Brummer , a German war vessel scuttled during the aftermath of World War I .
A Police Scotland spokesperson said the sighting , which was reportedly made by divers from the local area , was reported to the force at 10:40 BST -LRB- 0940 UTC -RRB- yesterday .
The persons have yet to be formally identified , although it is thought the bodies are of two male divers from the Netherlands , who had been diving on May 28 on the remains of the ship .
The failure of the divers to re-emerge above the water and the subsequent alert by the skipper of the divers ' boat prompted a large-scale search of the area , which was abandoned after two days as no sighting of the divers had been reported .
Scientists have successfully created a Lithium ion micro-battery the size of a grain of sand .
A team of researchers from Harvard University and the University of Illinois were able to create the tiny battery using 3D printing technology .
In order to achieve this feat , the separate parts of the battery were printed layer-by-layer using materials thinner than a human hair .
This resulted in two separate comb-like structures which , when interlocked , act as the anode and cathode .
These were then immersed in an electrolyte solution which created a working battery .
This created a micro-battery comparable to what is commercially available in `` charge and discharge rate , cycle life and energy densities . ''
For years , scientists have been trying to develop miniature devices in a range of areas including medicine and communications .
Sheikh Hamad seized power in 1995 through a bloodless coup that removed his father from the throne .
Former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi was convicted today of having sex with an underage prostitute .
Berlusconi was charged with paying for sex with Karima El Mahroug , a Moroccan-born nightclub dancer who performs under the name ` Ruby Rubacuori ' -- Ruby the Heartstealer .
Prosecutors say El Mahroug had sex with Berlusconi when she was aged 17 .
El Mahroug admits having received thousands of euros from Berlusconi .
In addition to the sex charges , Berlusconi was found guilty of abusing his office when dealing with El Mahroug .
The court found that in May 2010 , Berlusconi put pressure on police officers in Milan to release El Mahroug who had been arrested on suspicion of theft .
Berlusconi claims that he telephoned the police but did so on the belief that El Mahroug was related to former Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak in order to prevent a diplomatic incident .
In May of this year , an Italian appeals court upheld a conviction for tax fraud which Berlusconi is in the process of appealing to the country 's highest appellate court , the Court of Cassation .
If the decision is upheld by the higher court , he will be liable to serve four years in prison for the tax fraud offense , where Berlusconi was found to have bought distribution rights for American films and resold them at inflated prices to reduce the tax liability of Mediaset , Berlusconi 's media company which owns the three largest television stations in Italy .
The mother of murdered teenager Stephen Lawrence met with Britain 's Home Secretary Theresa May to discuss the investigation of claims that the police attempted to collect evidence from the Lawrence family in order to smear them .
Theresa May had previously announced Monday the allegations would be investigated as part of two ongoing inquiries , but representatives of the Lawrence family demanded an independent public inquiry into the events .
Doreen Lawrence said in the meeting May had said `` all options are open '' .
Lawrence said the inquiry `` should be open and not behind closed doors so that we can hear once and for all exactly what was going on after Stephen was murdered -LSB- ... -RSB- I think unless we have a public inquiry that goes through the whole thing , we will never get to the bottom of it '' .
Stephen Lawrence was stabbed in London in 1993 by a gang of white teenagers while he waited for a bus .
Lawrence 's killers were not convicted for eighteen years ; failures in the police investigation led to an inquiry led by Sir William Macpherson that found the police to be `` institutionally racist '' .
While a member of the undercover squad , Peter Francis posed from 1993 to 1997 as an anti-racist campaigner and infiltrated a number of left-wing protest groups .
Francis claims anti-racist campaigning after the death of Stephen Lawrence was considered by some in the Metropolitan Police to be a potential source for rioting and public disorder similar to the riots in Los Angeles riots in reaction to the treatment of Rodney King by police .
Neville Lawrence also called for an independent inquiry : `` I understand that the home secretary has announced that she will extend the inquiries of Mark Ellison QC and Operation Herne , I would like to make it clear that I find this completely unsatisfactory . ''
He added : `` I am convinced that nothing short of a judge-led public inquiry will suffice and I have no confidence that the measures announced today -LSB- Monday -RSB- will get to the bottom of this matter . ''
David Cameron has expressed support for the Lawrence family : `` Let 's be clear , these are absolutely dreadful allegations and we can only think of the Lawrence family , who have suffered so much already from the loss of their son .
Cameron said he hopes investigations in to the allegations will happen `` rapidly '' .
London mayor Boris Johnson also expressed disapproval with the alleged actions of the police : `` I can not think of anything more despicable than the police attempting to smear Stephen Lawrence 's family .
The CRTC said they will also be imposing a number of competitive safeguards .
For example , BCE is required to adhere to certain sections of the CRTC 's code of conduct for commercial arrangements , the purpose of which is to limit potential behaviour which would stifle competition as well as to treat independent programming services and distributors fairly .
When the deal is completed , BCE 's share of the English-language and French-language market will grow to 35.8 % and 22.6 % , respectively .
BCE will be required to keep running all of its local TV stations while maintaining their current levels of local programming .
Fiji 's national airline Air Pacific has now officially returned to its original name : Fiji Airways .
Fiji Airways adopted the Air Pacific name in 1971 , slightly prior to its first international flight on June 3 , 1973 .
The re-brand was described by interim CEO Aubrey Swift as allowing the airline to align itself `` closer with Fiji as a destination '' .
The name change is designed in part to reduce the confusion which surrounded the name Air Pacific .
Swift noted that `` Air Pacific just did n't resonate with our customers '' and said that same people `` thought we were an air conditioning company '' .
The airline 's new brand-mark and livery features a masi design created by Fijian artist , Makereta Matemosi .
It is authentic , distinctive , and true to the airline 's Fijian roots '' , the airline said .
Earlier today , San Fermín de los Navarros church in Madrid , Spain celebrated its patron saint day with a small festival in the street outside of and in the courtyard of the church with over two hundred people in attendance .
The patron saint day , San Fermín , marks the start of the Running of the Bulls in Pamplona .
Nine year old giant panda Yuan Yuan has given birth to a cub in a zoo in Taipei , Taiwan on Saturday at 8:05 pm local time .
The female cub was born weighing 6.4 ounces and measuring 6.1 inches .
It was the seventh attempt to get the nine-year old Yuan Yuan pregnant in a three year period .
The two pandas have failed to mate successfully through natural pregnancy , hence the use of artificial insemination .
Yuan Yuan showed signs of pregnancy in early June and towards the end of the month caretakers believed she would soon give birth .
Caretakers spent the night at the zoo , keeping a constant watch over Yuan Yuan during her birth .
China usually requests that cubs born in other countries be returned to China for care .
China has agreed to allow the newborn cub to remain in Taiwan .
Two Chinese panda specialists are at the zoo helping to care for the newborn .
Last night , Adly Mansour , the interim leader of Egypt , announced plans to reform Egypt 's constitution and hold a new round of parliamentary and presidential elections .
The interim president also announced a judicial investigation into yesterday 's shooting of at least 51 supporters of deposed president Mohamed Morsi .
Mansour plans to form a panel within fifteen days to review and suggest changes to the now-suspended constitution .
Those amendments would be voted on in a referendum within four months .
Parliamentary elections would then be held , perhaps in early 2014 , followed by presidential elections upon the forming of a new parliament .
One of the survivors , Mohamed Saber el-Sebaei , told journalists he was praying when the confrontation started : `` Just before we finished , the shooting started .
The army units that were standing in front of the Republican Guard headquarters first started shooting teargas , then live ammunition above people 's heads -LSB- ... -RSB- I was taking cover with another guy behind some rubble and I felt something hit my head .
The shooting of 51 people on Monday follows violence last week which killed 36 people in Cairo .
The Muslim Brotherhood have asked supporters to protest non-violently and support peaceful vigils .
Some within the Muslim Brotherhood movement have suggested they may be outlawed , as they were under Hosni Mubarak .
All sides of the political spectrum should work together for the sake of the country 's political and economic future . ''
Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair said the intervention by the army was necessary to prevent `` chaos '' , and said the protests that led to the downfall of Morsi are due to dissatisfaction with the efficacy of government : `` When governments do n't deliver , people protest .
Blair also blamed the `` ideology and intolerance of the Muslim Brotherhood '' : `` People felt that the Brotherhood was steadily imposing its own doctrines on everyday life '' .
Blair advised Western governments to `` engage with the new de facto power and help the new government make the changes necessary , especially on the economy , so they can deliver for the people .
In that way , we can also help shape a path back to the ballot box that is designed by and for Egyptians '' .
During an official visit to Romania on Tuesday , Moldovan premier Iurie Leancă invited his Romanian counterpart , Victor Ponta , to attend Moldovan Independence Day on August 27 .
On that occasion , the two neighbouring countries are to start building a cross-border gas pipeline between cities Iași , Romania , and Ungheni , Moldova .
European Union -LRB- EU -RRB- commissioner for energy Günther Oettinger is also expected to attend the meeting .
The Moldovan premier seeks support for EU visa facilitation for Moldovan citizens as well as economic and energy ties with the EU .
Russian energy minister Aleksandr Novak declared in September 2012 that the Russian Federation agrees to lower gas prices for Moldova only if the ex-soviet republic denounces the Energy Community of South East Europe between the EU and eight non-EU countries including Moldova .
The latest Transparency International report on global corruption says Moldovan citizens report the second most widespread bribery of a European country .
Moldovan politicians often accuse each other of being either under the influence of Russia -- the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova ; or under the influence of Romania and the EU -- the Alliance for European Integration , the current government coalition .
Russia maintains a motorized infantry battalion and some ammunition depots from the soviet era in Moldova 's breakaway Transdnestr region ; Russian vice-premier Dmitry Rogozin said earlier this year Russia would continue these until the status of the region is settled .
This situation has persisted for some time ; in the OSCE Summit Declaration of Istanbul of 1999 , Russia was to pull its troops out of Transnistria by the end of 2002 .
Yesterday , the United Kingdom 's House of Lords passed the Marriage -LRB- Same Sex Couples -RRB- Bill at Third Reading , the last major step in changing the law to allow marriages between same-sex partners in England and Wales .
The bill is to become law this week and same-sex marriage ceremonies are likely to start in 2014 .
During the brief debate in the Lords , Peers supporting the law wore pink carnations .
The Lords discussed an amendment to review how to deal with survivor pension benefits due to the same-sex partners of those in civil partnerships .
Other amendments the Lords have discussed include a review on whether to allow humanists to conduct weddings , and a review on whether to allow opposite-sex partners to enter into civil partnerships .
A handful of opponents of the Bill spoke during the debate including Lord Cormack , who said : `` Those who support the Bill have won ; there is no doubt about that .
Lord Framlingham criticised `` the Government 's complete rejection of any meaningful amendments '' and said the Bill `` is built entirely on pretence .
From this deceit have sprung all the problems we have been wrestling with -- problems we have failed to resolve and which will bedevil generations to come . ''
In summing up the debate , Baroness Stowell said : `` I believe that we have brought forward a Bill that is a force for good and that the change it brings about is right and reflects the change in society .
However , there is no question whatever that anybody who disagrees with it should in any way feel that their views have not been properly taken into account during our debates . ''
A group of supporters of the Bill held a celebration outside Parliament yesterday during the debate and carrying on into the evening .
A small number of opponents of the Bill turned up to protest .
The celebrations included musical performances by the London Gay Big Band and the London Gay Men 's Chorus , and Ben & Jerry 's provided free ice cream and cake .
Gould told Wikinews he retired from playing after the 2002 World Championships .
He was awarded a scholarship by Basketball Australia and the Australian Sports Commission , and became assistant coach of the Under 23 Men 's team in November 2011 .
He noted the Gliders have another training camp coming up in Brisbane in August .
This is to be an open development camp any player can attend .
Twelve players are to be selected for the Asia Oceania Zone -LRB- AOZ -RRB- Wheelchair Basketball Championships in Bangkok in November .
The top three teams then qualify for the World Championships , to be held in Canada next year .
He is acutely aware the Gliders have never won a World Championship or a Paralympics .
This , he said , is what he and Glider 's head coach Tom Kyle are trying to teach the Gliders .
Gould told Wikinews they have to look not just to the 2016 Summer Paralympics in Rio in 2016 , but further ahead to 2020 .
They have to recruit new players and develop them .
He set up a mentor system whereby the six newcomers were each paired with one of the old hands .
Wikinews was shown how the games are videoed and critiqued by the coaches .
Special software allows the videos to be edited .
The edited video can then be downloaded by the players .
Gould said there is a weekly video conference with the players .
He noted the Gliders had to play Brazil in the first match of the Paralympics in London , which was very tough , because so little was known about them .
Wikinews noted one of the Gliders , Amber Merritt , had her arm in a sling .
Gould said her arm had been scanned , and the doctors will make their evaluation .
He said he did not want players playing injured , and sometimes it was better just to lose a week if you have the flu .
Gould told Wikinews the Asia Oceania Zone championships will feature Australia , Japan , China , Thailand , South Korea , and perhaps Hong Kong .
The venue in Bangkok is well known to him , as the U23 Men 's team have already played there .
His plan is to arrive early , to allow the players to acclimatise to the high humidity and the food .
Some of the U23 men got sick .
He does not expect difficulty qualifying , but it is `` one of the I 's that have to be dotted and T 's that have to be crossed . ''
He said Australians intend to apply full pressure , but one of their objectives is also to help the competition .
By building up the teams in the Asia Oceania Zone , he hopes Australian teams will not have to travel so much or so far to meet first class competition .
Sunday , July 21 , 2013 The nineteenth edition of the Maccabiah Games , one of the largest sporting events in the world , was inaugurated Thursday in Jerusalem 's Teddy Kollek Stadium .
Jewish athletes from all over the globe take part in this event every four years .
US gold Olympic gymnast Aly Raisman lit the Maccabi cauldron .
The ceremony was attended by the President of Israel , Shimon Peres , along with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Jerusalem 's mayor , Nir Barkat .
This year , over 40 sports are scheduled to be contested by more than 70 countries .
The British cyclist Chris Froome won the 100th Tour de France yesterday following the conclusion of the final stage in Paris .
The final stage of the Tour was won by Marcel Kittel from Germany .
Quintana edged out Froome by eleven points to take the King of the Mountains jersey while Peter Sagan took the green points jersey .
169 riders completed the twenty-stage tour at Paris ' Champs Élysées .
Last year , Froome came second to Sir Bradley Wiggins who did not participate this year following injuries .
Froome 's victory speech was dedicated to his mother Jane , who died in 2008 from cancer : `` Without her encouragement to follow my dreams , I 'd probably be at home watching this event on TV .
British Prime Minister David Cameron tweeted congratulations to the 28-year-old Froome : `` A brilliant win by Chris Froome .
After two British winners it 's only right the Tour de France comes to Yorkshire next year '' .
A train derailment at 20:41 local time -LRB- 1841 UTC -RRB- yesterday just outside the city of Santiago de Compostela in Galicia in north-western Spain has left at least 77 people dead and 131 injured , of which 20 are in a serious condition .
Authorities have not yet definitively given a cause for the crash but are currently treating it as likely to be an accident .
The train was going from Madrid to the coastal city of Ferrol .
Reports indicate the train was travelling at an excessive speed -- 180 kilometers an hour , more than twice the recommended speed of 80 kilometers an hour .
RENFE , the train company , have said the train was running five minutes late .
Ricardo Montero , a man who was on the train , told radio station Cadena SER : `` A lot of people were squashed on the bottom .
The crash occurred a day before a festival in Santiago was due to start , which has now been cancelled .
The Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy made a statement : `` In the face of a tragedy such as just happened in Santiago de Compostela on the eve of its big day , I can only express my deepest sympathy as a Spaniard and a Galician . ''
Rajoy is to visit the site of the accident today .
Chicago politicians this past weekend asked Cardinal Francis George not to pull funding from immigration campaign groups who support legal recongition of same-sex marriage .
Groups that potentially could lose funding of between US$ 25,000 and US$ 30,000 a year include organizations affiliated with the Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights , Latino Union , Resurrection Project , United African Organization , Centro de Trabajadores Unidos , Albany Park Neighborhood Council , ARISE Chicago , Chicago Workers Collaborative , Interfaith Leadership Project and Most Blessed Trinity .
Initial threats of funding cuts were made in June , following a statement in May by the Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights that indicated support for same-sex marriage in Illinois .
The June funding threat cuts were originally uncovered by Chicago Sun-Times columnist Mark Brown .
Eight Catholic Democrats signed a letter to the Cardinal and the Catholic Campaign for Human Development expressing their concern that the Cardinal is playing politics over the same-sex marriage issue at the expense of immigrants .
Politicians who signed the letter included Chicago 46th ward alderman James Cappleman , Cook County Commissioner John Fritchey , City Clerk Susana Mendoza , Chicago aldermen Proco Moreno and Chicago 40th ward alderman Patrick J. O'Connor , retired Cook County Judge Maureen Durkin Roy , Chicago 25th ward alderman Daniel Solis and Cook County Commissioner Larry Suffredin .
John Fritchey is quoted in the Chicago Sun-Times as saying of the letter , `` You often run into conflicts when politics and religion intersect .
-LSB- ... -RSB- The letter simply reflects our position that a fundamental tenet of Catholicism is compassion .
I do n't think anybody would suggest that compassion is something that should be used as a hammer to accomplish other philosophical goals .
-LSB- ... -RSB- I 've known Cardinal George for a long time .
Cardinal George is quoted by Fox 32 Chicago responding to the letter : `` It is intellectually and morally dishonest to use the witness of the church 's concern for the poor as an excuse to attack the church 's teaching on the nature of marriage .
Manipulating both immigrants and the church for political advantage is wrong . ''
The threats take place against a backdrop of political debate in the state over legalizing same-sex marriage , with the possibility of the Illinois House and Senate addressing the issue during their fall session .
Twenty-five couples are currently suing the state of Illinois in order to gain access to marriage equality and over 200 Illinois clergy have signed an amicus brief to support the couples .
A man and a woman have been killed in a road traffic accident near Connel in the west of Scotland .
Seven people , including three children , were also injured in the head-on collision on the A85 road in Argyll at approximately 1830 BST -LRB- 1730 UTC -RRB- yesterday .
A 74-year-old female passenger of a blue Honda CRV and a 32-year-old male passenger of a blue Vauxhall Vectra died at the scene of the crash .
The Vauxhall driver , a 32-year-old woman , was transported by helicopter to Glasgow 's Southern General Hospital , where she is reportedly in a critical albeit stable condition .
A Scottish Fire and Rescue Service spokesperson said hydraulic cutting equipment was used during rescue efforts .
`` Ambulance personnel and police officers worked closely with our team throughout the incident but sadly one passenger from each car lost their life '' , the spokesperson continued .
`` The thoughts of all emergency responders who were at the scene will be with the casualties and their loved ones as they attempt to come to terms with what has happened . ''
An air ambulance reportedly attended the scene of the crash .
The woman was taken to Southern General Hospital in Glasgow .
Her husband died at the crash site .
The Toyota driver , a 34-year-old woman , was uninjured but as a precaution was taken to Inverclyde Royal Hospital .
Greenock Road was closed between Nelson Street and Brisbane Road following the incident but reopened around 4:00 pm BST -LRB- 1500 UTC -RRB- yesterday .
A report about the incident is to be sent to the procurator fiscal .
Police have appealed for potential witnesses to the accident to contact them .
This past Sunday , Illinois Governor Pat Quinn signed into law a bill known as `` Rocky 's Law '' that requires Illinois high schools , through the local school district , to buy catastrophic injury insurance up to US$ 3 million or medical costs for up to five years , whichever one comes first , that covers student athletes .
The insurance must cover student athletes while they are competing .
Before parents can claim money from school insurance , they first must pay out US$ 50,000 .
Schools have until January 1 , 2014 to comply with the law .
Schools can not charge students more than US$ 5 to defray the cost of insurance .
If a school district already requires student to be covered through private health insurance , they are exempted from this law .
On Sunday Peter Capaldi was named as the twelfth Doctor on BBC 's Doctor Who .
The announcement was made as part of a live broadcast by the BBC .
Capaldi had been considered by executive producer Steven Moffat for the role of the eleventh doctor before Matt Smith was ultimately chosen .
The role became vacant after Smith announced earlier this year that he would be leaving the show .
Capaldi said of his selection for the role , `` Being asked to play the Doctor is an amazing privilege .
Capaldi 's first screen appearance in this role is scheduled to air on television in late 2013 .
Tokyo Electric Power Company , owner of the Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant in Japan , has for the first time released figures on how much radioactive waste the facility has emitted , since being damaged by a 9.0 magnitude earthquake on March 11 , 2011 .
Approximately 20 trillion to 40 trillion becquerels of nuclear energy has leaked since the disaster occurred , TEPCO said when releasing their data on August 5 , 2013 .
The release of TEPCO 's figures came just one day after a 6.0 magnitude earthquake hit Miyagi .
Russia Today reports that the tremor hit in approximately the same location oas the 9.0 magnitude earthquake that struck Fukushima in 2011 -- a disaster that destroyed much of the Fukushima power plant , claimed the lives of over 15,000 people and caused over 3,200 people to go missing .
As of Monday , over 200 New York City area bars and restaurants had committed to boycotting Russian vodka in response to anti-homosexuality related laws passed by the country 's government .
The boycott follows another event that took place on Monday where bottles of vodka were poured onto the streets of the city , as part of a protest by the President of United Restaurant and Tavern Owners Association , Paul Hurley .
The press conference announcing the New York City boycott took place at Desmonds Steakhouse located on the 38th Street and 7th Avenue .
LGBT activists and models attended the event .
Johnny Donovan , manager of J Donovan Productions , is quoted by the New York Daily Times as saying , `` Shame on Russia !
Activists in other cities are also boycotting Russian vodka .
A protest at the San Francisco City Hall took place on Tuesday , where vodka was dumped into the sewers .
On social media , the hashtag #dumpstoli is being used to draw attention to the boycott and protests .
Dodds of Time Magazine points out , `` At first glance , Stoli seems a logical target for those hoping to promote greater awareness of the plight of gays in Russia .
Not only is it widely associated with the country , vodka is also one of Russia 's most profitable consumer exports to the U.S. -LSB- ... -RSB- But while Stoli 's ingredients -- wheat , rye and raw alcohol -- are Russian , the vodka itself is distilled in Latvia and distributed in the U.S. by William Grant & Sons USA , an American subsidiary of a Scottish corporation . ''
The international popularity of the brand have resulted in the company being continually threatened with nationalization by the Russian government .
A Pew Research Center study published in June suggests that attitudes towards homosexuality in Russia found the population to be the least accepting of homosexuals of nine other European countries also surveyed .
Countries with less acceptance than Russia included in the survey include Lebanon , Turkey , Egypt , Jordan , Tunisia , Malaysia , Indonesia , Pakistan , Kenya , Uganda , Ghana , Senegal and Nigeria .
Negative Russian attitudes towards homosexuality are also supported by research conducted by Russian Levada Center .
The homosexuality issue as it pertains to Russian law comes against the backdrop of the 2014 Winter Olympics and Paralympics scheduled to be hosted in the Russian city of Sochi early next year .
Last week , Russian Minister of Sport Vitaly Mutko reaffirmed the country will enforce these laws during the Games and foreign athletes , journalists and spectators will be subject to them .
Sheehan is best known for her active opposition to the War in Iraq following the loss of her son Casey there in 2004 .
According to her website , Sheehan also advocates revolutionary socialism , believing it to be key to loosening the `` Imperialist/Capitalist two-party stranglehold '' on U.S. and world politics .
During the campaign , she championed the reduction of U.S. troops abroad , and endorsed economic democracy , bank nationalization , single-payer health care , education subsidies , marijuana decriminalization , alternative fuels , and electoral reform .
The party promotes socialism , feminism , and environmentalism .
Cindy Sheehan : First of all , unfortunately third party candidates NEVER win for high level state or federal offices , and now since Prop 14 passed , it is even harder .
In California , I think I may have a good chance to advance to the general election and hopefully force the other candidate , -LRB- Brown , ? -RRB-
Sheehan : We already have many Californians who have volunteered to host the campaign with fundraisers and town hall meetings .
Sheehan : Well , since I am challenging him , I would rate his performance as poor .
I would hold dozens of town hall meetings to talk to the people of this state about their struggles and community-based solutions and work with the people to put their needs first and foremost .
Sheehan : I majored in US History at UCLA and was focusing on California history , so I admire someone who ran for governor , Upton Sinclair , more than anyone who actually was elected .
Our EPIC campaign is modeled off of his .
May I also say that it 's way past time that California elected a female ?
The 2013 Sunshine Coast Rugby Union regular season came to a close yesterday with Maroochydore claiming the minor premiership .
Maroochydore defeated Caloundra 40 to 23 at Cotton Tree Oval while second-placed Noosa defeated Fraser Coast 55 to 8 in Urangan .
Wikinews was present at Sunshine Coast Stadium where University defeated Nambour 40 points to 10 .
Both teams were playing for pride as neither could progress to the finals .
Nambour opened the scoring kicking a penalty goal , going ahead 3 -- 0 .
Both teams would score a converted try during the next ten minutes or so .
University would score three tries in the last ten minutes of the first half to go to half time leading 33 points to 10 .
Located on the Palu'e Island , Mount Rokatenda threw rock and ash into the sky causing local destruction .
Lava spilled onto the beach , killing three adults and three children in their sleep .
Rescuers have recovered the bodies of the adults but the children 's remains have still not been found .
In an interview with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation , Tini Thadeus , head of the local disaster agency , says he is pessimistic about recovering the bodies .
Due to the remains being buried under hot material , Thadeus believes they will be difficult to reach .
Indonesian rescuer Bakri Kari raises more doubt about the recovery as he describes the scene , saying that it was `` tough '' walking in the area as the ground is `` covered in ash 10 to 20 centimeters thick . ''
British-born astronaut Michael Foale has retired from NASA after dedicating the past 26 years to space exploration .
Considered the most experienced British-born astronaut in human spaceflight , Foale is said to have spent 375 days in orbit , visiting the International Space Station , Mir platform and completing work on the Hubble Space Telescope .
Foale was present in the 1997 Mir station incident , where it was accidentally rammed by a cargo ship .
It all started to fit together and a plan even started to form in all our minds that we would be ok -- or we could be ok . ''
Foale will now be spending his time helping to advance green aviation technology , his aim being to develop an electric aircraft .
NASA administrator and former fellow astronaut , Charles Bolden , said in a statement : `` Starting with his first flight , shuttle mission STS-45 , when we flew together in 1992 , Mike has worked tirelessly to support NASA 's quest to explore the unknown .
I know Mike will go on to do more great things as he continues to support the aerospace industry in his new endeavour . ''
South African President Jacob Zuma announced yesterday that the health of former President and anti-apartheid campaigner Nelson Mandela was showing a `` slow but steady improvement '' .
Zuma 's statement mirrors that of Mandela 's youngest daughter Zindzi who told the state-owned television company SABC on Friday that Mandela `` now manages to sit up , like now he is able to sit up in a chair for a few minutes in a day .
Zindzi was confident in her father 's recovery : '' -LSB- He -RSB- is determined not to go anywhere anytime soon .
People must stop saying to the family ` let go , let go ' .
We are just looking at this man who is saying ` I 'm not going anywhere ' . ''
According to legal documents filed by Mandela 's family , he was at one stage on life support .
All vehicles entering the hospital in Pretoria where Mandela is being treated are being searched by police officers .
Well-wishers have left messages and flowers for Mandela .
News emerged yesterday that Boko Haram Islamists are suspected to have killed 44 worshippers during dawn prayers early Sunday morning in the small town of Konduga in Nigeria .
The attacks were believed to be a revenge on citizen vigilante groups forming to help the government battle Islamist extremists and occurred 35km from the state capital Maiduguri .
A further 26 people are being treated for severe injuries .
Boko Haram 's insurgency has killed at least 3,600 people since 2009 , including killings by security forces .
In recent weeks the military has encouraged the formation of vigilante groups to help locate and arrest members of Boko Haram .
Boko Haram has attacked churches and mosques .
A video has been released where Boko Haram 's leader Abubakar Shekau takes responsibility for the attacks .
Alexander Zhukov , the deputy Prime Minister and head of the Russian Olympics Committee told the Russian state news agency RIA Novosti : `` If a person does not put across his views in the presence of children , no measures against him can be taken .
People of nontraditional sexual orientations can take part in the competitions and all other events at the games unhindered , without any fear for their safety whatsoever . ''
Last week , British actor Stephen Fry wrote an open letter to British Prime Minister David Cameron arguing the Winter Games ought to be relocated , and Russian President Vladimir Putin `` is making scapegoats of gay people , just as Hitler did Jews '' .
Fry argued '' -LSB- anti-gay -RSB- beatings , murders and humiliations are ignored by the police .
Fry attended a protest in London on Saturday against the Russian laws on homosexuality .
At the protest he said : `` All homophobic regimes say this -- they say they do it for the children .
What they have done is unleashed thugs who have done unspeakable things to teenagers , lured them , beaten them , humiliated them , tortured them .
On Twitter , David Cameron responded to Fry 's call for a relocation of the Games : `` Thank you for your note @stephenfry .
However , I believe we can better challenge prejudice as we attend , rather than boycotting the Winter Olympics . ''
Lord Sebastian Coe , head of the British Olympic Association , also rejected the call for a boycott or relocation : `` only damage one group of people , and that is the athletes .
Coe also argued the Olympics and other sporting events help promote social change : `` International sport is not an inhibitor of social change , it actually has quite strong catalytic effects .
I am a profound believer that the relationships developed through international sport are often in the infancy of social change . ''
U.S. President Barack Obama has also rejected a call for a boycott .
At a press conference at the White House last week , he stated : `` I want to just make very clear right now : I do not think it 's appropriate to boycott the Olympics -LSB- ... -RSB- We 've got a bunch of Americans out there who are training hard , who are doing everything they can to succeed .
Irish budget airline Ryanair have stated intent to sue the UK 's Channel 4 over a documentary broadcast Monday night which discussed safety at the airline .
Secrets of the Cockpit focused strongly on fuel policy and featured interviews with pilots .
Part of the Dispatches series , the show reported on an incident in Spain last year where three Ryanair jets declared fuel emergencies after being diverted to Valencia .
Pilots interviewed for the programme said they felt pressured to save fuel , the cost of which has hit Ryanair 's profits .
The Spanish Air Authority described Ryanair flights usually landing with a bare minimum of fuel , in a report the airline dismissed as `` manifestly inaccurate and factually untrue '' .
Ryanair say their planes carry more fuel than European Union legislation requires and point out the Irish Aviation Authority -LRB- IAA -RRB- monitor their safety record , including fuel policy .
Ryanair has never had a fatal accident and the IAA called Secrets of the Cockpit a `` misguided attack '' which was `` based upon false and misleading information '' .
The IAA itself was accused of failing to respond to concerns from Ryanair pilots and one interviewee said his `` personal belief is that the majority of Ryanair pilots do not have confidence in the safety agencies and that is a pretty critical issue '' .
An IAA statement yesterday morning read `` The IAA has responded to personal letters and reports from Ryanair pilots , this included several meetings and face-to-face interviews with pilots and their legal and professional representatives . ''
The statement added `` Ryanair Plc fully complies with all European and international regulations in all areas of its operations '' .
Channel 4 promised to see Ryanair in court , saying `` We stand by our journalism , and will robustly defend proceedings if they are initiated . ''
Ryanair called the documentary `` false and defamatory '' .
Other claims in the documentary included that twelve cockpit voice recorders had been wiped after serious incidents , which Ryanair blamed on pilot error and said is a common occcurence in aviation , and that a survey by Ryanair Pilots Group -LRB- RPG -RRB- found widespread safety concerns at the airline .
RPG is not recognised by the airline which calls the group '' -LSB- lacking -RSB- any independence , objectivity or reliability '' .
The airline says they conducted their survey , which polled 1,000 flight crew , as part of a long campaign to unionise Ryanair pilots .
The airline makes heavy use of zero-hour contracts , which do not guarantee work and which the Irish Airline Pilots ' Association describe as offering some of aviation 's worst employment conditions .
According to the RPG survey almost 90 % of respondents said the safety culture was nontransparent .
Two-thirds said they felt uncomfortable raising safety issues .
Ryanair had told pilots anybody signing a `` so-called safety petition '' might be dismissed .
One anonymous pilot interviewed by Channel 4 accused the airline of `` threats and bullying '' .
Over 90 % of those surveyed wanted a regulatory inquiry , with RPG saying the survey results were passed to the airline and the IAA .
RPG chairman Evert van Zwol , also a recent Dutch Airline Pilots Association president , said zero-hour contracts tended to make pilots choose to fly when unwell and keep quiet if they had safety concerns .
In 2005 a Polish Ryanair pilot became lost near Rome a few days after attending his son 's funeral , while his Dutch co-pilot was seeing his first experience of navigating severe weather .
In the 2005 incident air traffic control intervened to keep the flight safe from midair collisions .
The Polish pilot told Italian investigators he feared losing his job if he took extra time off work .
The investigation concluded in 2009 he had been unfit to fly .
Ryanair denied he would have been fired for taking time off to recover .
The Indian Navy has said that two explosions yesterday on INS Sindhurakshak , a Russian-built Kilo-class submarine , have trapped up to eighteen of its sailors .
Navy officials have warned the families of trapped sailors to `` prepare for the worst '' .
The stricken vessel sank in its berth in Mumbai with only a small portion still visible on the surface .
A fire that started as a result of the explosions has been brought under control and other sailors that managed to escaped received attention from emergency personnel .
Divers are attempting to locate survivors and refloat the vessel .
In 2010 , a fire broke out after an explosion in the battery compartment on the INS Sindhurakshak , killing a sailor .
The submarine had recently returned from Russia after undergoing an overhaul and upgrades after the 2010 incident .
These developments come just days after the Indian Navy launched the nation 's first Indian-built aircraft carrier , INS Vikrant , which the navy calls their `` crowning glory '' .
Cotton Tree Oval , Maroochydore , Queensland -- Noosa won its way into the Sunshine Coast Rugby Union Grand Final yesterday at Cotton Tree Oval , Maroochydore , Australia .
In the Under 19s , top-place Noosa defeated second placed Caboolture 28 points to 7 after leading 21 -- 0 at half time .
In Reserve grade Noosa defeated Maleny 29 points to 3 after leading 17 -- 3 at half time .
In the A-grade game , Noosa proved to dominate for Maroochydore going 13 -- nil up after 28 minutes .
Maroochydore would get three points back with eight minutes left in the half but gave Noosa an intercept try a minute later .
With Noosa leading on the score board -- 18 points to 3 -- Maroochydore centre Ian Parkes sin binned fifteen minutes into the second half .
Noosa went further ahead with the resulting penalty .
The match was stopped for a couple of minutes with about 24 minutes to play while a spectator was dealt with for directing abuse at the referee .
The offending party seems only to have been cautioned at this point .
Two tries in the final moments were not enough to see Maroochydore through to the Grand Final .
As they were celebrating the second of these a streaker entered the playing area , running the length of the field before absconding down a nearby road .
Irish budget airline Ryanair have dismissed pilot John Goss , who has worked with the airline for 25 years , over remarks he made in a documentary about safety at the airline .
Ryanair issued a statement confirming legal proceedings have been begun against Goss .
The airline is already suing the UK 's Channel 4 over Monday night 's broadcast of Secrets of the Cockpit , part of the Dispatches series , in which Goss appeared .
The programme discussed the airline 's safety with a focus on fuel policy , investigating allegations Ryanair uses a bare minimum of fuel and intimidates pilots who raise concerns .
Goss , who had been due to retire in October , is a key figure of Ryanair Pilots Group -LRB- RPG -RRB- , which conducted a survey of more than 1,000 flight crew .
Following an incident in Spain in which three Ryanair flights declared fuel emergencies after being diverted to Valencia the Spanish Air Authority described Ryanair flights usually landing with a bare minimum of fuel , in a report the airline dismissed as `` manifestly inaccurate and factually untrue '' .
Over 90 % of those surveyed wanted a regulatory inquiry , with RPG saying the survey results were passed to the airline and the Irish Aviation Authority .
RPG is not recognised by the airline which calls the group '' -LSB- lacking -RSB- any independence , objectivity or reliability '' and a union front .
The other pilots interviewed by Channel 4 chose to remain anonymous , with only Goss identifying himself .
The airline says RPG only conducted their survey to unionise Ryanair pilots and issued a statement describing the documentary as `` based on nothing more than anonymous hearsay claims made by individuals whose identity was concealed , and/or by representatives of pilot unions of Ryanair 's competitor airlines masquerading as a non-Ryanair Pilot Group '' .
Ryanair claim Goss wrote to the airline saying he had no concerns about safety , stating `` We will not allow a Ryanair employee to defame our safety on national television just three weeks after he confirmed in writing to Ryanair that he had no concerns with safety and no reason to make any confidential safety report '' .
The airline further say they `` look forward to correcting Mr Goss 's defamatory claims in court '' .
The move confirms the carrier 's expression of intent to sue Channel 4 after the UK broadcaster screened Secrets of the Cockpit , a documentary about safety at the airline , on Monday night .
In Sweden a report into a Ryanair emergency landing concluded this week an airline employee wiped the cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder to prevent the investigation accessing them .
The aircraft had returned to an airport near Stockholm shortly after takeoff suffering electrical malfunctions .
Ryanair reject the Swedish Accident Investigation Authority 's take on the missing data , telling newspaper Södermanlands Nyheter recordings were reset by a technician trying to repair the aircraft after consultation with Ryanair 's technical department , who did not think the recordings needed saving .
Ryanair , which has never suffered a fatal accident , says the documentary is `` false and defamatory '' , and the IAA says it is `` based upon false and misleading information '' .
`` We have been instructed to vigorously prosecute these libel proceedings , '' said a statement from Ryanair 's lawyers , who promised `` other litigation is pending '' .
Ryanair have also sacked veteran pilot John Goss for appearing on the show , the only pilot interviewed who did not seek anonymity .
Ryanair have stated intent to sue Goss and claim he confirmed in the weeks before the show that he had no issues with his employer 's safety .
Goss is a member of Ryanair Pilots Group -LRB- RPG -RRB- , which the airline call a union front .
Mirror Group publish The Daily Mirror , its Sunday sister , and The People .
Secrets of the Cockpit also examined an RPG poll of 1,000 Ryanair flight crew , dismissed by the airline as part of unionisation efforts .
Two-thirds said they felt uncomfortable raising safety issues , with a pilot interviewed by Channel 4 accusing Ryanair of `` threats and bullying '' .
Over 90 % of those surveyed wanted a regulatory inquiry , with RPG saying the survey results were passed to the airline and the Irish Aviation Authority -LRB- IAA -RRB- .
The IAA has already called the programme a `` misguided attack '' on Ryanair , saying `` Ryanair Plc fully complies with all European and international regulations in all areas of its operations '' .
The authority responded `` The IAA has responded to personal letters and reports from Ryanair pilots , this included several meetings and face-to-face interviews with pilots and their legal and professional representatives . ''
Ryanair makes heavy use of zero-hour contracts , which do not guarantee work and which the Irish Airline Pilots ' Association describe as offering some of aviation 's worst employment conditions .
New Zealand yesterday legalised same-sex marriage , with a surge in marriage applications , according to New Zealand 's Department of Internal Affairs .
New Zealand is now the first country in the Asia-Pacific region to legalise same-sex marriage , and the fourteenth country to do so worldwide .
After passing a bill in April of this year , the New Zealand parliament amended the country 's previous marriage act that had stood since 1955 .
The bill was approved with a majority vote of 77 to 44 in favour of amending the marriage act to allow same-sex marriage .
Under the new Marriage -LRB- Definition of Marriage -RRB- Amendment Act , marriage in New Zealand is now defined as `` the union of two people , regardless of their sex , sexual orientation , or gender identity '' .
According to the Australian Marriage Equality campaign group , 1,000 Australian same-sex couples indicated in a survey that they intend to travel to New Zealand to marry .
The amendment to New Zealand 's marriage act has received some opposition from both the Catholic Church and the Anglican Church .
Anglican Church leaders have insisted that ministers refuse to conduct same-sex marriage ceremonies until their annual Synod takes place next year .
The Reverend Matt Tittle , who conducted on of the first same-sex ceremonies , said however `` All love is holy . ''
In an official report by the Pyongyang media , the reunions are set to take place at a North Korean tourist resort on the 19th September .
This agreement came after joint plans between the two states were announced to reopen the Kaesong Industrial Complex , which saw North Korea withdraw it 's 50,000 workers in April in protest against the increase in United Nations sanctions .
Families who were divided by the Korean War between 1950-53 have only been granted opportunities for reunion since 2000 , with the last meeting being scheduled in 2010 .
Due to the lack of direct mail and telephone lines connecting the North and South , over 80,000 South Koreans registered to take part in the previous reunion however not all were accepted into program .
Egyptian General Abdel Fattah el-Sisi has announced that the army will no longer hold restraint against any remaining protesters .
el-Sisi made his first public comments about the crack down on sit ins via Egyptian Television on Sunday , saying full force will be used against `` attackers who want to destroy Egypt '' .
Tension in Egypt is escalating as supporters of ousted president Mohamed Morsi are still protesting on the street as of Sunday despite the major crack down on sit ins by Egyptian army .
According to Russia Today , Morsi followers have reacted to el-Sisi 's statement on Egyptian news by taking to the streets on Sunday afternoon .
Several protest groups were said to be heading to the Constitutional court .
Officials within the Muslim Brotherhood stated that planned protests were not followed through due to `` the presence of army snipers on buildings along the routes . ''
Crack downs on protests are believed to continue until pro-Morsi followers agree to stand down from their hope of re-instating Morsi .
Information Minister Pervaiz Rasheed on Sunday said Sharif and Zardari will meet when the President returns to Pakistan from a trip , to discuss state execution in Pakistan .
More than 8000 Pakistani prisoners are on death row according to Amnesty International .
Zardari and Sharif differ in their position on capital punishment .
President Zardari banned state executions in Pakistan in 2008 , a policy Prime Minister Sharif reversed in June this year , when his government came into office .
Sharif had planned to re-introduce executions by the end of this month .
Although Zardari as President put a temporary hold on state executions , he will step down from office in September this year .
Mamnoon Hussain is to take his place as President of Pakistan , a firm supporter of Prime Minister Sharif .
The stay on state executions may conflict with the scheduled hangings of two Islamist extremists , Attaullah and Muhammad Azam , who were originally to be hung between August 20 and 22 .
The men are members of Sunni militant group Lashkar-e-Jhangvi , and were found guilty in 2004 of the 2001 murder of a Shia doctor named Ali Raza Peerani .
Reports say anywhere between 100 and 1,300 people were killed in Wednesday 's alleged chemical attack , but there are no reports of injuries or deaths in yesterday 's bombings .
Some of the pictures and video coming out of the country do n't show blood and dismembered bodies , but instead show , according to witnesses , those who died from apparent suffocation ; some were foaming at the mouth and others were having convulsions .
One video posted to YouTube purportedly shows a young girl who survived the alleged attack , yelling `` I 'm alive , I 'm alive . ''
At one point , according to The Washington Post , the girl even tries to convince the hospital official she is still alive .
The bombings come as United Nations observers began to arrive to investigate claims of chemical weapons use elsewhere in the nation .
According to Russian officials , the Syrian government is ready to give UN observers `` maximum cooperation '' while they perform their investigation .
`` We hope that the results will clarify the issue and will help to dispel numerous speculations around the alleged use of the Syrian chemical weapons while simultaneously creating a positive background for the moves towards the start of the political process of settlement of the Syrian crisis , '' Aleksandr Lukashevich , Russia 's foreign minister , said yesterday .
Syrian officials say the alleged chemical attack was staged and carried out by rebel forces to `` draw attention to their cause '' ahead of the arrival of UN observers .
A previous attempt by the UN to end the violence in Syria failed .
In May of 2012 , a UN convoy was hit by an IED -LRB- improvised explosive device -RRB- while a human rights group reported a Syrian military attack on civilians at a nearby funeral in the town of Khan Sheikhoun in Idlib province .
Later that year in August , a 300 person team left the country after their mandate expired , and was never renewed .
Commander of the 2012 observation team General Babacar Gaye expressed frustration against both the Syrian armed forces and rebels for not allowing the UN to complete its mission .
Part of the plan included both sides working and cooperating with the UN special envoy , commitment to ceasing hostilities , and the Syrian army ceasing troop and tank movements against rebels in `` population centers '' throughout the country .
42 or more people have died , the Lebanese health ministry says , and over 500 wounded , from two car bomb explosions yesterday in the largely Sunni Muslim Lebanese city of Tripoli .
The blasts occurred outside of the Taqwa and al-Salam mosques while hundreds of worshipers were gathered for Friday noon prayer .
The first explosion , near the Taqwa mosque , reportedly occurred at 1:50 pm local time -LRB- 1050 UTC -RRB- killing 14 or more .
The second , in which further deaths were reported , was caused by 100 kilograms of explosives according to the Interior Ministry .
Hezbollah condemned both the Tripoli explosions which they said they believed were part of `` an effort to plunge Lebanon into chaos and destruction '' .
Lebanese Defence Minister Fayez Ghosn said `` We are calling for calm and vigilance , because the aim of -LSB- these blasts -RSB- is to stoke strife between sects '' .
Sunshine Beach , Queensland -- Maroochydore denied Caboolture a shot at back-to-back Sunshine Coast Rugby Union A-grade premierships today defeating them 24 points to 7 at Dolphin Oval , Sunshine Beach , Australia .
Caboolture qualified for this match by beating Caloundra in the Minor Semi Final ; Maroochydore lost the Major Semi Final against Noosa .
Maroochydore is now set to play Noosa in the A-grade grand final while , in the lower grades , Maleny had both of its teams move through to grand final day .
Their reserve grade side defeated Maroochydore 53 -- 24 and their under 19s beating Caboolture 29 -- 20 .
In the A-grade game , Maroochydore proved to dominate for Caboolture going 19 -- nil up at half time .
Maroochydore would cap off the win right on full time with an unsuccessful penalty .
Unlike a week earlier , those in attendance were reasonably well behaved .
A transgender woman attacked in Harlem , New York last week died on Thursday after being declared brain dead and taken off life support .
Police are treating the death of Islan Nettles , 21 , as a hate crime .
Nettles was walking with transgender friends early on August 17 when they met a group of men opposite a local police building .
Police say a fight ensued after the men discovered the group was transgender and local man Paris Wilson , 20 , was arrested at the scene .
Wilson was charged by prosecutors in Manhattan with assault and harassment .
Prosecutors say more serious charges could be brought after police received allegations homophobic language was used , with a hate crimes team now investigating .
The death has been ruled a homicide and a spokeswoman for the New York City medical examiner 's office said Nettles was killed by `` blunt impact head injuries '' .
The criminal complaint Wilson presently faces says a police officer found Nettles `` unconscious on the ground with a swollen shut eye and blood on her face '' .
Wilson is accused of punching Nettles to the ground and then repeatedly hitting her while she lay there .
Nettles was interested in a fashion career , working as an intern for local fashion firm Ay'Medici .
`` Fashion became a definite decision for my life after my first show with my hand designed garments in highschool '' , she wrote on LinkedIn , where she described herself as `` anti-violence '' .
According to state-run Syrian Arab News Agency -LRB- SANA -RRB- , during a battle with rebels yesterday the Syrian army seized a stockpile of chemicals , canisters , weapons and gear located in a warehouse tunnel in Jobar , a suburb of Damascus .
In a post on the social networking website Twitter , SANA claims some soldiers involved in the battle were exposed to some kind of chemical agent and in some cases `` suffocated , '' but the number of those killed , if any , was not reported .
`` Army heroes are entering the tunnels of the terrorists and saw chemical agents '' , said SANA , as quoted by Al-Alam News Network .
`` It is believed that the terrorists have used chemical weapons in the area '' , quoted by CNN .
The Syrian government often labels members of the Free Syrian Army and other rebels as `` terrorists . ''
SANA says government forces were fighting rebels and pushed into Jobar where they seized the items in a warehouse .
In a video by SANA and published by RT News , at least one of those items , a box labeled `` coverall - CW protective , '' was made in the United States .
Pictures also show grenades , rockets and what appear to be several other unknown chemical agents .
Government forces say the stockpile belonged to rebels and opposition forces .
The country 's largest opposition group , The Syrian National Coalition -LRB- CNFROS -RRB- , released a statement denying the use of chemical weapons in both today 's and Wednesday 's battles .
They deny even possessing chemical weapons saying the `` information disclosed by the regime -LSB- is -RSB- false '' and the accusations attempt `` to disguise and conceal his -LSB- Assad 's -RSB- repeated and systematic crimes against Syrian civilians . ''
The seizure comes just days after government forces were accused of carrying out a large-scale chemical attack in the Ghouta region of Damascus on Wednesday .
Reports say anywhere between 100 and 1,300 people were killed in the attack .
Prior to today 's incident and after Wednesday 's alleged chemical attack , government forces heavily bombed the area .
The fighting comes as United Nations observers arrived to investigate claims of chemical weapons use elsewhere in the nation .
According to one report , government forces have retaken control of Jobar .
The break-up took place after she lost to Simona Halep of Romania in the third round at last week 's Cincinnati Masters .
Stosur claimed her fourth WTA title in Carlsbad earlier this month , against Belarusian Victoria Azarenka -- a former world number 1 and victor of last week 's Cincinnati Masters .
`` Neither of us , I 'm sure , would have wanted it to happen right then , and obviously with winning that tournament almost makes it seem a little bit strange , '' Stosur acknowledged .
In eight days , the US Open -- which Stosur won in 2011 -- is scheduled to begin at its usual venue in Flushing Meadows , New York .
Stosur says she feels confident for the weeks ahead , having already proved capable of ousting Azarenka : `` I think now coming into the US Open I 'm feeling quite good .
Australian former tour player Alicia Molik , already with other duties at the Open , has agreeed to fill the role of Taylor .
While these arrangements are not permanent , Stosur now has someone to support her on the practice court , and closely watch her matches during the two weeks as per usual .
Stosur nor Taylor have n't spoken since last week 's break-up ; however , she says she hopes this does not remain the case . ''
German weekly publication Der Spiegel yesterday accused the United States ' National Security Agency -LRB- NSA -RRB- of spying on the United Nations headquarters in New York .
The magazine claims to have access to official NSA documents , provided by former NSA and CIA computer specialist and current fugitive Edward Snowden .
If the allegations of bugging are confirmed , it would mean that the United States has breached International Treaties including the 1946 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations .
The Treaty states that countries must not carry out covert operations that relate to the UN 's activities .
Der Spiegel claimed that , according to their intelligence , the NSA was able to bug the UN headquarters by hacking into its video conferencing system in the summer of 2012 .
Their article included quotes from the leaked documents like '' `` The data traffic gives us internal video teleconferences of the United Nations -LRB- yay ! -RRB- '' .
Allegedly , decoded UN communications rose from 12 to 458 within three weeks of the NSA gaining access .
Analysed documents also indicated the NSA found evidence Chinese spies were also monitoring the UN , and began logging what the Chinese were accessing .
The UN 's nuclear watchdog in Vienna , the International Atomic Energy Agency , and the European Union are said to be among the organisations NSA spies have been targeting .
The US government has previously denied any wrongdoing by the NSA , although President Barack Obama this month announced plans to curb government spying activities .
The Defikopter is to be launched by an app that sends out the GPS coordinates of the victim .
With the ability to fly at 70km per hour in all weather conditions , the eight-armed octocopter could reach any patient within a ten kilometre radius .
The invention has received cautious praise from German medical services ; the drone is still in the development and testing stage .
Definetz and collaborating drone builder Height Tech have not issued any information about the release of the smartphone app or about when the drone will be available for medical services to purchase .
`` We 'll have to see how much these drones can help , '' German emergency services union representative Marco König told The Local .
German news site Mittelbayerische reports a price tag of $ 20,000 -LRB- US$ 26,000 -RRB- apiece .
One major problem Definetz faces is the law that requires all unmanned flying vehicles in Germany to be supervised .
Another is that only members of the public who downloaded the app ` just in case ' of an emergency , plus emergency workers with the app , could summon a drone .
The derailment occurred at approximately 3:00 a.m local time -LRB- 8:00 a.m UTC -RRB- , with eight of the twelve cars overturning .
The state government reported that at least 250 Honduras citizens were traveling on the train , which had a scrap metal cargo .
The train company and rescue workers continue to search the wreckage and treat survivors , but the remote and marshy site hinders efforts .
Two cranes have been dispatched to assist .
Mario Bustillos Borge , the Red Cross chief in Tabasco , noted that current information on the numbers deceased and injured was hard to confirm due to the complex nature of the rescue .
The first car and the engine , which did not overturn , were used to transport the injured to a local hospital in Veracruz .
The train , dubbed ` The Beast ' by locals , was headed north from the Guatemalan border at the time of the accident .
Migrants regularly try to hitch a ride to the US by climbing onto its roof or in between cars .
Preliminary reports suggest that the tracks had shifted following heavy rains .
Violent clashes occurred between police and the demonstrators , some of who threw stones at the police forces .
The largest rally occurred in the city of Ostrava where between 600 and 800 protestors attacked the police and at least 60 were detained .
Seven other cities , including Prague , saw similar protests .
`` We have seen a deeply worrying trend over the past year with entrenched discrimination against Roma reaching new heights .
This is a fundamental issue that the Czech authorities ca n't ignore , '' Amnesty International 's John Dalhuisen said .
The European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights conducted a poll in 2011 that found over 80 per cent of the Roma people surveyed had been subject to discrimination in the past year .
Early last night , massive attacks targeted China 's Internet , slowing access to a crawl .
cn domain was targeted in the latest of many denial of service attacks against China .
The domain was attacked twice , once at 2am local time , and again at 4am .
The second was larger , and Chinese officials said work to restore service was progressing slowly .
State-run newsmedia said numerous .
This outage comes at a sensitive time for China , with the trial of Bo Xilai , a former government official , having just ended .
The attack also comes amidst rumors that the Chinese government will be cracking down on social media commentators , according the The Wall Street Journal .
According to a Wall Street Journal interview with Matthew Prince , CEO of CloudFlare , a company that tracks web traffic and metrics , during the attack Chinese Internet traffic dropped by 32 % .
No injuries were reported in the attack , but the UN says at least one vehicle was destroyed and several were shot at .
The team left the scene and returned at a later time with a new vehicle .
`` What I am told is that despite the very difficult circumstances , our team replaced their car and returned to the suburbs of Damascus to carry out their investigation , '' said UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in a statement on Monday .
Both the rebels and Syrian government are said to have been granted `` safe '' passage while performing their investigation which has to be completed in 14 days , not including any possible extensions .
The team arrived on August 18 and is investigating the scene of an alleged chemical weapons attack that occurred on August 21 in the Ghouta suburb of Damascus .
Reports say anywhere between 100 and 1,300 people were killed in the attack which is being blamed on government forces , something they deny .
`` We hope that the results will clarify the issue and will help to dispel numerous speculations around the alleged use of the Syrian chemical weapons while simultaneously creating a positive background for the moves towards the start of the political process of settlement of the Syrian crisis , '' Aleksandr Lukashevich , Russia 's foreign minister , said on August 22 .
This is n't the first time a UN convoy has been targeted in Syria .
In May 2012 a convoy was hit by an Improvised Explosive Device -LRB- IED -RRB- while one of their human rights groups reported a Syrian military attack on civilians at a nearby funeral in the Syrian town of Khan Sheikhoun in Idlib province .
The latest attack on the UN comes as a US government official called their current investigation `` too late to be credible . ''
Following the alleged chemical attack on August 21 , the Syrian army heavily bombed the area against what they called rebel strongholds .
`` The fact is that much of the evidence could have been destroyed by that artillery bombardment , '' said William Hague the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom on Sunday .
The United States -LRB- U.S. -RRB- says the attacks are `` corrupting '' any evidence the team might have come in contact with .
Two reports by the British newspaper The Guardian suggest the U.S. might not wait for the team to finish their investigation .
According to the reports , U.S. transport planes have been arriving within 100 miles of Syria in Cyprus .
The Guardian cites sources which say U.S. Forces are `` ready to go '' in the event a strike on Syria is ordered .
According to the newspaper 's report , commercial airline pilots claim to have observed C-130 transport planes visually and fighter jet formations by radar .
The newspaper also claims residents say military activity has been increased .
According to Wikileaks , the whistle blowing website , a document shows the U.S. would use Cyprus as the main base of operations to launch an airstrike against Syria .
The document is part of a 2012 leak labeled the `` Global Intelligence Files '' which consists of emails from within the global intelligence firm Stratfor .
Brits and French would fly out of there .
They kept stressing how much is stored at Cyprus and how much recce comes out of there , '' says part of an email in a communication by Stratfor employees .
Civilians began protesting against Assad in March of 2011 .
One of the first cities government forces began to attack in an effort to stop the protests was Homs .
In July of that year , at least one person was killed and dozens injured when government forces opened fire on protesters .
Late that month , government forces launched an offensive against protesters across the nation , resulting in around 100 deaths in the city of Hama and several dozen more in other parts of the country .
Tokyo Electric Power Company -LRB- TEPCO -RRB- , who run the plant , announced the leak last week and the new accident 's level-three rating was made after consultation with the International Atomic Energy Agency .
However , the Nuclear Regulation Authority notes this estimate may be overstated as it relies on the leaking tank being full before the leak began .
There is no gauge to measure water quantities inside the tank , used to store contaminated water after the initial accident .
Water is being collected at a rate of 400 tons per day , and an unknown quantity of radioactive groundwater is flowing into the sea .
Industry minister Toshimitsu Motegi has already announced increased governmental supervision of TEPCO 's leak mitigation after two other leaks this year .
Nuclear Regulation Authority disaster taskforce leader Shinji Kinjo has said TEPCO fails to document inspections and is poor at monitoring the tanks on the site .
TEPCO staff had said water levels in the tank had remained constant .
Shunichi Tanaka , head of the Nuclear Regulation Authority , said `` We have no idea whether it 's actually 300 tons that leaked .
TEPCO initially said the leak was small when it was found in July and the watchdog gave it a level one `` anomaly '' rating at the time .
Inspectors now say radiation below this tank stands at 100 millisieverts per hour , and another at the facility has a level of 70 millisieverts per hour .
`` One hundred millisieverts per hour is equivalent to the limit for accumulated exposure over five years for nuclear workers ; so it can be said that we found a radiation level strong enough to give someone a five-year dose of radiation within one hour , '' said TEPCO boss Masayuki Ono last week .
TEPCO shares dropped yesterday by 2.6 % to 497 yen .
Workers including drivers for Kuehne and Nagel Drinks Logistics -LRB- KNDL -RRB- have voted in favour of striking .
KNDL , which delivers beer and soft drinks to about 30,000 locations in the UK , was in talks with Unite yesterday to try and resolve the dispute .
The vote is a response to a proposed restructuring in which a number of operations currently performed at the firm 's 29 distribution centres would be relocated to three new ` super-hubs ' .
Although no distribution centre closures are currently planned , the union says workers fear future job losses , and are also concerned products will spend more time on the road , spoiling the taste of beer .
A Unite official said `` We have tried to engage with the company but they have repeatedly failed to resolve this dispute . ''
A KDNL spokeswoman said `` We are committed to continuing dialogue with Unite in order to reach a resolution before any action is taken . ''
She also pointed out Unite is yet to decide dates for the strike ; Unite has described `` one final chance '' to resolve the dispute .
A Unite ballot of 970 KNDL employees produced a turnout of 64 % of which 85 % voted to strike .
The distribution centres involved are mostly in England , but sites in Aberdeen , Dundee , Bathgate , and Inverness in Scotland and Swansea in Wales are also affected .
KNDL delivers high-profile brands including Britvic soft drinks and Heineken , Kronenbourg , and Fosters beer .
Maroochydore have defeated Noosa 15 to 10 to win the 2013 Sunshine Coast Rugby Union premiership yesterday afternoon at the Sunshine Coast Stadium , Bokarina , Queensland .
Noosa had won both the Reserve grade and Under 19s Grand Finals against Maleny , 36 -- 11 and 22 -- 5 respectively .
Maroochydore had finished on top of the ladder , six points clear of Noosa in second .
The two sides would meet in the major semi final where Noosa ran out winners by 11 points .
Maroochydore then defeated Caboolture in the Preliminary Final .
From its beginnings in 1982 through 2006 , Maroochydore and Noosa were the only two clubs to win the Sunshine Coast A-grade rugby union premiership .
University were the team to break this run -- winning in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 .
Noosa would reclaim the premiership in 2010 before University and Caboolture won the next two respectively .
On Thursday Hawaiian Airlines announced all their Boeing 767-300 aircraft would be fitted with iPad mini tablets made by Apple for in-flight entertainment from September 1 .
The new gadget would be served on 14 routes connecting Hawaii with mainland USA , Asia , and the South Pacific .
Passengers in business class would be able to use the tablet for free while economy class passengers would need to pay $ 15 when purchasing the service before boarding -LRB- or $ 17 if purchased during the flight -RRB- .
The airline offered such price with the help of Bluebox Avionics , a company specializing in in-flight services .
The airline has purchased 1,500 iPad minis to replace old in-flight entertainment devices .
The carrier becomes the first US airline to offer iPads as an in-flight service .
In 2010 Jetstar , a subsidiary of Qantas , became the first airline in the world to introduce such a service in a test pilot on two services from Melbourne .
During the next few years Iceland Express , airBaltic , and British Airways joined in .
In March Qantas began offering iPads on flights connecting Honolulu and Sydney .
Yesterday , Ruth Bader Ginsburg became the first United States Supreme Court justice to officiate a same-sex marriage .
The ceremony took place in the District of Colombia , in the atrium of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts .
The center 's President Michael M. Kaiser married economist John Roberts before a group of around 200 guests .
Ginsburg is quoted by the Washington Post as saying of her officiating , `` I think it will be one more statement that people who love each other and want to live together should be able to enjoy the blessings and the strife in the marriage relationship -LSB- ... -RSB- It wo n't be long before there will be another '' .
The Supreme Court Justice is scheduled to officiate at another same-sex wedding ceremony later this month between David Hagedorn and director of communications and executive affairs for the National Weather Service Michael Widomski .
`` His home has been reconfigured to allow him to receive intensive care there .
The health care personal providing care at his home are the very same who provided care to him in hospital . ''
Best known for an interview with former President Richard Nixon following the Watergate scandal , Frost died on Saturday night aboard the Queen Elizabeth cruise ship , where he was due to give a speech .
`` His family are devastated , and ask for privacy at this difficult time , '' said a statement released from Frost 's family .
Frost got his start in the early 1960s presenting on satirical BBC show That Was The Week That Was .
With a career spanning five decades , Frost would go on to interview an extensive list of the famous and powerful - including virtually every British Prime Minister and US President of his time , as well as royalty , celebrities and leaders including Mikhail Gorbachev and The Beatles .
Highly versatile , Frost would prove confident at both serious political journalism as well as light entertainment and comedy , hosting sketch show The Frost Report in the mid-60s .
Frost famously interviewed former US President Richard Nixon in 1977 , during which Nixon apologized for the Watergate scandal -- where Nixon had bugged the offices of political opponents .
The face-off would be turned into multi-Oscar nominated film Frost/Nixon in 2008 , with Frost played by Michael Sheen .
Frost wrote 17 books , produced eight films and started the British television networks London Weekend Television and TV-am .
He became Sir David after being knighted in 1993 , and won numerous awards for his work throughout his time .
Radiation at Japan 's damaged Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant yesterday spiked to lethal levels around a leaking tank .
Today the national Nuclear Regulation Authority -LRB- NRA -RRB- said contaminated water may be pumped into the sea .
Kansai Electric Power today began shutting down one of only two reactors still generating power in Japan , reactor # 3 at Oi Nuclear Power Plant , for mandatory inspection .
The other , Oi 's reactor # 4 , is to be permanently switched off this month .
When the accident began nuclear energy supplied a third of Japan 's power requirements , but in the aftermath of Fukushima the nation has switched to fossil fuels .
Tanks holding contaminated water at the site continue to leak ; operator Tokyo Electric Power Company -LRB- TEPCO -RRB- says up to 300 metric tons may have leaked from one tank alone .
Radiation at that tank soared to 1,800 millisieverts per hour yesterday , a rate lethal to an exposed human in about four hours .
Japanese law says nuclear workers can not be exposed to more than 50 millisieverts in a year .
TEPCO says other locations at the plant have readings of 70 -- 230 millisieverts per hour .
Waste water totalling more than 300,000 tons has already been collected at the site ; more is being stored at a rate of 400 tons per day .
An unknown quantity of radioactive groundwater is flowing into the sea .
NRA boss Shinichi Tanaka told a press conference today that stored water may be pumped into the Pacific after treatment to reduce contamination to within legal limits .
`` I 'm afraid that it is unavoidable to dump or release the water into the sea , '' he said , adding `` careless management '' was being applied to the water by TEPCO .
TEPCO first noticed a leak at the now-deadly tank in July but said it was minor and the NRA gave it a level one `` anomaly '' rating on the seven-part international scale .
Last week that was raised to `` serious incident '' , level three , after TEPCO said up to 300 tons of water had leaked .
The exact amount is unknown as there is no gauge to measure levels inside the tank and TEPCO staff had said water levels in the tank had remained constant .
Last week levels under the tank , where lost water is thought to have seeped into the ground , stood at 100 millisieverts per hour , and another at the facility had a level of 70 millisieverts per hour .
TEPCO found another leak yesterday in a pipe between coolant tanks .
Highly radioactive material was dripping out , but TEPCO says the leak is now fixed .
Monitoring at the site has been increased since the original leak 's discovery two weeks ago .
Around 1,000 tanks are used to store water from the power plant 's coolant system , which was contaminated when three reactors melted down after a tsunami in March 2011 .
Around 160,000 people were evacuated in the worst nuclear disaster since 1986 .
The new radiation involves beta rays , TEPCO said , which can be stopped with a sheet of metal .
Water treatment has extracted caesium from the tanks but other radioactive elements remain .
TEPCO 's equipment to remove other contamination is out of action due to filter corrosion after a few months of operating , but the government has demanded it be returned to service this month .
None of the tanks have monitoring equipment and TEPCO 's initial procedure involved two employees manually checking each tank over a two-hour period .
Since the tank was found to be leaking the total monitoring staff has increased from ten to 60 , and patrols are carried out four times a day instead of twice a day .
Prosecutors brought criminal charges against TEPCO and government officials including then-Prime Minister Naoto Kan for their handling of the crisis formed after the tsunami .
Daily newspaper Sankei Shimbun today claimed all charges , brought after local residents complained , were to be dropped .
Sankei Shimbun suggests a formal announcement may come within days .
International airlines have responded to potential United States military escalation in Syria in the past several days by planning to reroute their airplanes around the region .
Airlines with plans include Abu Dhabi-based Etihad Airways , Bahrain-based Gulf Air , Kuwait-based Al Jazeera Airways , Dubai-based Emirates Airlines , and United Kingdom-based British Airways .
Gulf Air said in an e-mail to Arabian Business , `` Nonetheless , given the current political climate , the airline has fully prepared contingency plans in case of any military intervention in the coming days -LSB- ... -RSB- These contingency plans are ready for implementation should there be any changes in the current situation in Syria .
Such plans could potentially involve re-routing aircraft away from Syrian/neighbouring airspace .
At the moment operations continue as normal and we are ready for all eventualities . ''
Gulf Air says it currently has no flights passing over Syrian airspace .
Several airlines have already suspended commercial services into Syria , including Etihad who did so a year ago .
Al Jazeera suspended their services during the final quarter of 2012 .
Last week , Cyprus Airways rescheduled their flights into Beirut because of the potential conflict .
Several airlines have had to deal with similar situations in the past few years as a result of events connected to the Arab Spring that closed parts of Middle East airspace and airports .
In the long term , it really depends on how Putin sees the long term interests of himself and his nation vis-à-vis the United States and America 's western allies .
How extensive any attack by the US on Syria will determine the full impact on US -- Russia relations .
I think the real story is that in the past two weeks , we have seen an amazing shift in how the Executives of the United States -LRB- President Obama -RRB- and the United Kingdom -LRB- Prime Minister Cameron -RRB- execute foreign policy .
In the post-War period , committing the nation to take military action was seen as the prerogative of the President and Prime Minister , with the legislatures of both countries providing , at best , weak oversight .
In the United States , there is the War Powers Act and the authorisation of the first Gulf War , but the President 's authority was rarely challenged nor was it really believed that the President needed to consult Congress .
In the UK , you would have to go back to the late 1700s to find the last time a Prime Minister was truly rebuffed on a matter of military intervention .
A significant number of those sitting on the backbenches of Parliament and in the Congress are thinking of balancing their nations ' budgets in times of fiscal austerity , and they have ties to constituencies , which do n't want to see their country shed blood and treasure in another prolonged conflict in the Middle East where the backgrounds of the rebel groups the US and UK are supporting is not well defined and the end goals are uncertain .
Boehner has not been able to carry Republicans in the past .
In our surveys fewer than 1 -LSB- in -RSB- 5 respondents were open to the idea of sending American ground troops into Syria .
TS : I think Obama wants Congress to own this .
Some in Congress believe that the United States would be doing too little if it only carried out limited missile strikes to punish al-Assad .
The President was finding it impossible to please everyone , and instead , basically said sort out what you want me to do .
SH : That may have played a role but it is still not clear why President Obama has taken this course .
It may also be the case that he is looking to share the political risk that goes with attacking with Republicans and Congress in general .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Russian President Vladimir Putin has said Russia could back Syrian intervention if there was conclusive proof of regime guilt .
MR : It is difficult , if not impossible , to provide Moscow with the evidence that they are looking for .
In order to provide that specific information several criterions should be met .
First of all , the soil of the location where the alleged chemical weapons are used , should immediately be examined after the incident .
The Syrian government has not allowed immediate access to these places and usually reports come out days after .
Second , and more fundamentally , a concrete and observable evidence is needed for Russia showing that Assad 's government has used it as opposed to the rebels .
Supporters of the action say it can be justified under the recent doctrine of humanitarian intervention , but that is more a political rather than legal judgement .
According to -LSB- the -RSB- UN Charter , use of force is permitted only in case of self-defense or UNSC 's -LSB- United Nations Security Council -RSB- approval .
However , this does not mean that our current international law is devoid of any shortcomings .
The International system has some shortcomings because of the structure of the UNSC , where one member can veto a resolution and block actions .
SL : No , the Obama Administration has been uncertain about -- and many of its members opposed to -- regime change , and that is still the situation .
The military , in particular , is opposed to significant , long-term intervention because of its concerns over a fragmented , diverse opposition and what happens if Assad falls .
MR : If there was an efficient alternative to Assad , US would have seen the regime change to its political benefits and interests .
However , United States does not seem to have articulated any precise agenda towards Syria yet .
The policy is more '' Wait and See '' policy ; observing and reacting as things unfold in Syria and the region .
In June , the Administration finally said it would provide overt military assistance , but then pulled back and failed to deliver any public aid .
If United States conducts limited military operation , as the adminstration argues , and if US only targets some of the Syrian government 's military installments , it is less likely that United States will be drawn into the Syria 's civil war .
It would be a political suicide for Syria , Iran or Hezbollah to respond .
And If the Americans only use missiles .
They can cause severe damage , but leave Assad in his palace , and not being dragged into the civil war .
It is dependent on Russia 's reaction -- so far , Moscow has been able to pressure the US into caution , but a decision for intervention by the US might call Russia 's bluff , so to speak , and force some caution by the Russians .
Already , Moscow has said it will not join a fight against any US military action .
MR : Military intervention , in the classic sense of putting troops on the ground , will definitely affect US-Russian long term political relationships .
Russia knows that the US is a super power and will not be interested in a real conflict with Washington .
But the Obama Administration 's divisions mean its first priority is getting some coherence in Washington , rather than blaming London .
Sydney University Sports and Aquatic Centre , Sydney -- Wikinews attended the finals of the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League at the Sydney University Sports and Aquatic Centre over the weekend .
The Stars fought their way back from being nine points down at three quarter time to take the lead with only minutes to go , thanks to a spectacular shot by Georgia Inglis .
The match saw Amber Merritt and Kylie Gauci engage in a protracted duel .
At one point Merritt suffered a bone-crunching sideways fall that the crowd feared meant she had injured her shoulder , but Merritt got back up again .
Gauci was fouled out in the last minutes , and Merritt used her free throws to put the Stars three points up .
Japanese import Mari Amimoto attempted to tie the game with a three pointer , but missed .
Merritt has suffered injury this season .
Surgeons had corrected where she had torn the muscle away from the bone .
The Bears won their place in the final by beating Victoria in the Qualifying Final on Friday night 40 -- 62 .
The Stars had to defeat the Sydney Uni Flames 66 -- 34 on Friday night and then Victoria 32 -- 48 on Saturday night to earn their place in the final .
Victoria defeated the Sydney Uni Flames 59 -- 42 to claim the bronze medals .
The Western Stars ' Clare Nott was named 1 point player MVP , Kylie Gauci was 2 point player MVP , Sarah Stewart from the Sydney Uni Flames was 3 point player MVP and Merritt was 4 point player MVP .
These four players , along with Cobi Crispin from Victoria form the All Star Five for 2013 .
Victoria 's Ellie Cole , who won four gold medals in swimming at the London Paralympics , was named Best New Talent .
Nonetheless , Cole told Wikinews that she was not giving up swimming to become a basketball player .
Mari Amimoto was named the MVP of the finals series , but Gauci was season MVP .
Liesl Tesch made a special presentation to Lisa Edmonds , a pioneer of the women 's game who has been playing wheelchair basketball for 24 years .
Lisa was part of the original Australian Women 's basketball team back in 1989 , and played in the 1992 , 1996 and 2000 Paralympics .
Starting next season , the league will be administered by Basketball Australia
With Halloween approaching , numerous haunted attractions all over Texas are preparing for the big `` haunt '' season .
Directors and staff of such attractions must invest significant time preparing their buildings ; such efforts gear up significantly during September .
Wikinews caught up with some owners of these attractions to learn more about the hard work it takes to prepare for opening night .
Terror Nights , an attraction in Tyler , opens for the season on September 27 .
Ryan Laepple , owner and director of the haunt , states he 's currently involved in `` a blur of safety inspections , auditions , actor training , and last but not least event advertising . ''
Laepple went on to say he stays `` pretty busy until the show opens on the 27th and then things calm down some .
Dean Jarnig , the director of Zombie Manor in Arlington , said he and staff have recently been spraying flame-retardant chemicals and installing new lights .
Jarnig also stated he and staff are working on a promotional video for their attraction , which opens on Friday September 13 .
Some individuals who act in these attractions refer to their fellow actors as extended family .
This year , some sources have even encouraged holiday job seekers to consider working at a haunted attraction to earn money .
One whimsically listed the job 's benefits as '' -LSB- ... -RSB- free uniforms , a complimentary hair and makeup consultation and make-over , inspirational background music , plenty of on-the-job exercise opportunities and more . ''
Long a staple in American culture , `` Haunted Houses '' , as they 're commonly called , range in size from small garage-sized projects , up to multi floor buildings outfitted with the most elaborate of lighting and special effects .
The particle keeps getting faster and faster until the signal disappears , however , just before this happens we observe that the slope of the acceleration changes .
This could be seen as a signature of `` quantum friction '' but we need to look more closely .
Alternatively , it might be a consequence of the sphere deforming at such high rotation rates .
MM : The main goal of the experiment was not to prove or disprove quantum friction but to develop a tool that might be useful to carry out these studies in the near future .
In order to use this experiment to prove or disprove quantum friction it is first necessary to completely understand and model its complex behaviour .
The main difficulty experimentally and theoretically is to combine all these fields simultaneously and make them work together to create a `` clean '' system that can test ` friction ' or other theories .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Previous research on the boundary between conventional and quantum physics has used atoms and individual molecules .
One of the main drives in present quantum technology is to create what is called mesoscopic or macroscopic quantum states , that is quantum states that can be see in a microscope .
One can expect that , depending on the mechanical failure property of the sphere , it would breakup sooner or later .
Optically , we can make the sphere rotate at any speeds smaller than the maximum speed .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Where would you like to see the research go next ?
The experiment was designed to explore the boundary between conventional physics , which applies to larger objects , and quantum physics , which applies only to extremely small objects .
Subatomic particles obey a very different set of rules than the items we see every day , but the behaviour of particles at just above quantum levels remains enigmatic .
MM : Indeed , two or more spheres would bring an additional degree of freedom to the experiments that would allow the study of the rotation rate as a function of the distance between them .
Some theoretical predictions suggest that quantum friction effects might be enhanced in this case .
In general , friction dissipates energy and is seen as a detrimental effect .
However , there are applications that use friction in a useful way .
Indeed , velocity dependent friction could also be used to slow down microscopic objects to the point where these objects would reach what is called the quantum ground state for their centre of mass .
Creating these states on demand would bring quantum technology a step closer and might lead us to `` couple '' quantum mechanically -LSB- macroscopic -RSB- objects -- a phenomenon more accurately termed entanglement .
While it might be more difficult to use smaller sphere in the experiment due to the trapping geometry , as it turns out this was a sphere synthesis problem .
The team wanted to expand upon research using single atoms or molecules , instead constructing a four-micrometre thick sphere of calcium carbonate , in a crystaline form called vaterite , in a bid to examine systems containing over a million atoms .
The ball was so small it could be manipulated using lasers ; light beams exert a force called radiation pressure .
With the ball held within a vacuum by a laser trap , the scientists were able to apply a twisting force through the light 's polarisation -LRB- orientation -RRB- as it passed through the ball .
The vacuum eliminated air resistance so that scientists could look for evidence of quantum friction , a proposed force that slows spinning particles without external assistance .
The spinning sphere turned into a miniature gyroscope , stabilising itself .
The ball cooled as it span to − 233 ° C -LRB- − 387 ° F , 40 Kelvin -RRB- .
The research was carried out by Dr. Yoshihiki Arita , Dr. Michael Mazilu , and Professor Kishan Dholakia .
Wikinews was able to ask Mazilu some questions about his research .
Michael Mazilu : The fundamental aspect that raised our interest is the mechanism that stops an object -LSB- rotating -RSB- infinitely fast in absence of friction .
Quantum friction is one possible but debatable mechanism that will ultimately limit the rotation rate .
One can also imagine other interesting mechanisms and we hope that future experiments will be able to conclusively distinguish between them .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- Press coverage has focused on the fact this is the fastest spinning manmade object ever created , but the aim of the experiment was to research quantum physics .
MM : From the beginning we wanted to go for a very fast rotating sphere to test the limits of transfer of angular momentum of light .
The motivation was to explore if we can see -LSB- if -RSB- any anomaly arose as we rotated the particle faster and faster .
The hope was to develop an experimental platform that would allow testing the boundary between classical and quantum physics .
That this worked better than expected was a happy accident .
MM : The spheres are produced by mixing three chemical compounds together -LRB- CaCl2 , MgSO4 and K2CO3 -RRB- until the mixture becomes transparent .
This happens in about 5 to 10 minutes and results in birefringent spherical vaterite crystals of 4.4 micrometer in diameter .
Over the past week , diplomatic actions have averted -- or , at least delayed -- military strikes on Syria by the United States .
Wikinews sought input from a range of international experts on the situation ; and , the tensions caused by Russia 's support for the al-Assad regime despite its apparent use of chemical weapons .
Brown : It -LSB- China -RSB- has always stood by non interference of other counties in the internal affairs of sovereign states ; though , this position has changed over time since it was formulated on the back of China 's experience of colonisation in the early part of the twentieth-century .
Its main priority now is to not see the escalation of issues , as was seen in Iraq and Afghanistan ; where it runs the risk of being sucked into lengthy conflicts with no real gameplan , and no clear outcome that is relevant to it .
It does not see the Syria -LSB- n -RSB- conflict -LSB- as -RSB- one where there is a an easy , viable , alternative option waiting to govern the country .
And , it is very sceptical about US and others ' claims that they can control this problem .
Roggeveen : China and Russia suspect the ` responsibility to protect ' doctrine , which was used by Western powers to justify the Libya intervention , was a smokescreen for regime change .
So , they are wary of seeing something similar happen in Syria .
China also prefers not to be on its own in the Security Council ; so , if the Russians come down against a Libya-like resolution , -LSB- the -RSB- chances are that China will join them .
Farhi : Libya has set a bad precedent for many countries who supported , or did not object to , NATO action .
So , yes , the Libya example is a precedent ; but , in any case , the Syrian dynamics are much more complex than Libya and both Russia and China -- as well as Iran -- genuinely see the attempt to resolve the imbroglio in Syria through military means as truly dangerous .
In other words , they see the conduct of Western powers in the past two years as spawning policies that are tactically geared to weaken the Assad regime without a clear sense or strategy regarding what the end game should be .
Particularly since at least part of the opposition to Assad has also elicited support from Islamic radicals .
Mitter : In general China is reluctant to take decisive action in international society , and -LSB- at -RSB- the UN .
It prefers its partners , such as Russia , to take on confrontational roles while it tries to remain more neutral and passive .
Roggeveen : At the moment , both sides -LSB- in Syria -RSB- evidently feel they can still obtain their objectives through force .
Perhaps one of them will be proved right ; or , perhaps there will be a long-term stalemate with Syria split between regime and opposition forces .
One important change is the chemical weapons agreement ; which now makes it much more difficult for the US or Israel to intervene militarily .
The deal also gives the regime some degree of status as a legal authority with which outside powers must negotiate .
That weakens the hand of the opposition ; but , it could open a door for an international diplomatic intervention to achieve -- firstly -- a cease fire .
Brown : There is no appetite for the kinds of expensive and very hard interventions -LSB- undertaken -RSB- in Iraq and Afghanistan .
And , in any case , the US and its allies do n't have the money to fund this , and their publics evidently feel no case has been made yet for getting involved .
People are weary of the endless arguments in the Middle-East , and feel that they should now be left to deal with their own issues .
China , in particular , has tried to maintain as strong a -LSB- ... -RSB- network of benign support in the region as possible , while avoiding getting sucked into problems .
There is no viable opposition in Syria that would make it easier to justify intervention ; and , no easy way of seeing how this tragic civil war is going to be easily ended .
Farhi : Syria has become the arena for a proxy war among regional and extra-regional players and yes its civil war will not end until all key players and their external supporters develop a political will to end the conflict .
For the conflict to end , the bankers feeding the conflict should agree to stop funding it .
Tensions in the country increased dramatically , late August when it was reported between 100 and 1,300 people were killed in an alleged chemical attack .
Many of those killed appeared to be children , with some of the pictures and video coming out of the country showing -- according to witnesses -- those who died from apparent suffocation ; some foaming at the mouth , others having convulsions .
-LRB- -LRB- Wikinews -RRB- -RRB- For many years , Syria has been considered Iran 's `` closest ally '' .
What vested interest does the Iranian government have in keeping Bashar al-Assad in power ?
Martel : Iran 's interests align very closely with that of Russia in supporting Syria and opposing the United States .
Further , during this last week , President Putin offered to help Iran build a second nuclear reactor .
The policies of Russia , Iran , and Syria align quite closely ; thus leading some -- such as myself -- to argue that we are seeing the rise of an `` authoritarian axis '' of states , whose policies are coordinated .
Even before the fall of Saddam in 2003 , Iran reinterpreted the basically pragmatic cooperation in the field of intelligence and security .
Ever since Syria was part of a so called `` axis of resistance '' consisting of Iran , Syria , Hezbollah , Hamas and Islamic Jihad , the sole common strategic denominator of these different actors is hostility against Israel , which is always depicted as an aggressor against whom the Muslims should resist -- hence , the -LSB- designation as an -RSB- `` axis of resistance '' .
Of course , forming an alliance ` officially against Israel ' serves another purpose too : to take a stand against Saudi Arabia without naming it .
Farhi : Syria supported Iran during the Iran -- Iraq war ; and , that dynamic forged a long-standing relationship between the two countries that includes economic , political , and military cooperation .
Despite this , Iran initially mostly followed the Russian lead in the Syria .
However as other regional players -- such as Israel and Saudi Arabia , as well as extra-regional players such as the United States -- began to see , and articulate the weakening of , the Assad regime as a first step to the weakening of Iran , this enhanced Iran 's threat perception , and gave it -LSB- an -RSB- incentive for further involvement in support of Assad .
Iranian -- Syrian relations are rooted in common strategic interests rather than in assumptions about US imperialism , or the role of the UN sanctions .
-LRB- -LRB- Wikinews -RRB- -RRB- The UN has `` overwhelmingly '' confirmed use of chemical weapons in Syria .
Do you think both sides have used chemical weapons ?
Kamrava : It is undeniable that chemical weapons were used in Syria .
Until valid evidence is made available -- proving who used chemical weapons -- affixing blame to either the government forces , or to one of the fractious rebel groups , is only a matter of speculation .
Martel : I remain skeptical that anyone other than the Syrian government used chemical weapons .
Amongst Syria 's few remaining allies , Iran , China , and Russia continue to oppose calls for military intervention .
In an effort to provide a better-understanding of the reasoning behind their ongoing support , the following people were posed a range of questions .
While foreign policies anywhere may be expressed -- and justified -- through slogans and ideological rhetoric , they are based on strategic considerations and calculations .
Iran 's support -LSB- for -RSB- Syria is designed to undermine US power and influence .
For Iran , no policy objective is more important than to possess nuclear weapons .
When the U.S. declared a `` redline '' if Syria `` used or moved '' chemical weapons , and then backed away from that redline , it is likely that Iran 's leadership drew one principal conclusion :
The belief in Iran -- that the US may not be willing to prevent Iran from possessing nuclear weapons -- could lead to a nuclear arms race in the Middle East .
Religion does n't play too much -LSB- of -RSB- a role , even though the conflict has been thoroughly `` sectarianised '' .
This happened a few years back when the Saudis baptised -LRB- if that term is appropriate -RRB- the `` axis of resistance '' to `` shiite crescent '' .
The domination of the Syrian Baath Party by members of one sect plays no role in Iran 's security equation .
The relationship is a complex one -- and , as mentioned before -- forged as a strategic bond during the Iran -- Iraq War , when Saddam 's regime was deemed aggressively expansionist by both regimes .
While sectarianism may be the lens through which some of the Syrian rebels see their fight against the government , ultimately the contest is over state power and capitalizing on opportunities created by the Arab uprisings in general ; and , the Syrian civil war in particular .
Posch : Usually , the Sunni -- Shia divide is something Iranians and Saudis play up in order to put pressure on one another ; usually , they were also able to deescalate .
Syria , however , is the game-changer -- for the simple reason that nobody believes the Saudis would control the post Al-Qaeda Networks in Syria .
Farhi : The Sunni governments in the region are working hard to use sectarian tensions as an instrument to fan popular resentments , in the region , towards Shi'ite Iran .
Iran , China , and Russia have remained as allies to the al-Assad government despite the alleged use of chemical weapons in Ghouta on August 21 , 2013 .
Do you think this means Russia 's interest lies in economic benefit , as opposed to the humanitarian crisis ?
It should be noted that in neither case is Russia actively interested in finding solutions to existing problems .
The extent to which Russia can undermine American influence directly helps to bolster Russia 's influence .
For now , Russia is such a vastly diminished power -- both politically , economically , militarily , and technologically -- that Russian policymakers are pursuing policies they believe will help to reverse Russia 's strategic decline .
Russia 's interests lie in maintaining that foothold , and perhaps extending it .
Blank : It is clear that Russia not only does not trust US interests and judgment in the Middle East , it regards Washington as too-ready to use force to unseat regimes it does not like and believes these could lead to wars ; more importantly , to the attempt to overthrow the present Russian government .
Martel : Russia 's policymakers understand that American and Russia interests directly diverge .
Russia seeks to undermine US geopolitical influence , and increase its own .
It is using its support of the Syrian regime to accomplish that objective .
American interests , by contrast , are largely to prevent the spread and use of chemical weapons .
It is true that Russia feels that the United States and NATO went beyond the mandate afforded to them by the UN Security Council in going after regime change in Libya .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- The Russian Government accepts that chemical weapons have been used in Syria .
How does it come to claim that the rebels are behind the attacks even though it is widely accepted that the al-Assad government has stocks of weapons ?
Worse , Russia 's basic credibility is undermined by such statements .
Farhi : Russia claims Syria has presented it -LSB- with -RSB- evidence that the rebels have used chemical weapons ; and Russia , in turn , has given the evidence to the UNSC .
The bottom line is -- the claim that the opposition to the Assad regime is at least as culpable in the violence being committed in Syria , opens the path for Russia to continue calling for a political solution -LSB- which -RSB- brings to the table all parties to the conflict in Syria , including Assad and his supporters ; something the multi-voiced opposition has so far refused .
-LRB- -LRB- Wikinews -RRB- -RRB- There are suggestions China wants to maintain its financial ties with Syria as its third largest importer in 2010 .
To support Assad , is to counter US policy and influence ; which is precisely what Putin 's government seeks to accomplish .
In many senses , Russia 's support for Syria is entirely secondary to Russia 's strategy of reversing its two-decade long decline in every measure of power .
With its weak economy , dependence on petroleum for half of its national income , and increasingly authoritarian government , Russia has relatively little to offer the world -- other than to oppose the United States as part of its strategy of reversing its decline .
Syria is a customer of Russian arms and goods ; hosting a naval supply base in Tartus .
But , as mentioned above , Russia has serious concerns regarding what comes after Assad .
Brown : I do n't think that is China 's key priority .
Its actions and support for the Russian position is derived from its general concerns regarding American imperialism and unilateralism .
Mitter : China will want , in general , to maintain financial ties with Syria as it does with many countries .
China 's general position is that internal politics of countries should not interfere with economic ties .
Roggeveen : That stance reflects China 's history as a weak , developing country with a host of territorial disputes with its neighbours .
Beijing does not want to set international precedents that will allow third parties to interfere with , for example , the Taiwan issue , Tibet , the East China Sea or the South China Sea .
But increasingly , China 's stance will conflict with its growing strength and growing responsibilities on the world stage .
China is already the world 's second biggest economy and a major strategic power in the Asia Pacific -LSB- region -RSB- ; and , it will increasingly be expected to take up responsibilities that come with such power .
Also , as we saw in the case of Libya -- where China sent a fleet of ships and aircraft to evacuate its nationals -- China has interests and citizens all over the world , both of which need to be protected .
Cathedral Square , Sydney , Australia -- Wikinews attended the Wheelchair Rugby Tri-Nations Series in Cathedral Square , Sydney , ongoing from Wednesday .
This is the first time an international wheelchair rugby event has been held outdoors , and in this arena .
An outdoor stadium has been constructed specifically for the tournament , which is believed to be the first time an international wheelchair rugby tournament has been held outdoors .
This choice was validated by the fine and warm weather .
Free sunscreen was given to the crowd .
Each team is to play the others two twice , on Wednesday September 18 and Thursday September 19 .
Finals are to be held on Friday .
All three teams are highly ranked internationally .
The Australian team , known as the Steelers , is ranked second in the world .
The team is almost unchanged from the one that won in London .
Greg Smith has become the assistant coach .
The first game , held immediately after the Opening Ceremony , was between the United States and Australia .
The United States proved the better team , forcing errors and turnovers .
Three turnovers in the first quarter were especially costly for the Steelers , who lost 56 -- 43 .
The second game was held at 17:30 under lights .
The crowd was small , but there were a number of New Zealand fans in the crowd , including a few Maori .
The well-disciplined United States team proved too good for the Wheel Blacks as well , who lost 58 -- 40 in an entertaining contest .
The Australians led the whole game , which was nonetheless entertaining to the last .
In the dying seconds of the game , Australia 's Ryley Batt shunted a stalling New Zealand player across the line to force him to score , then threw the ball to team mate Chris Bond , who raced for the line at high speed but was beaten by the buzzer .
The New Zealand team , known as the Wheel Blacks , is ranked tenth in the world .
The driver , as well as the passenger , alighted as six members of the team carried eVe over the stairs of University Mall .
eVe , the latest car built by the Sunswift team , was designed for the new Cruiser class of the competition , and thus meets regulations for normal roads-worthy vehicles .
While its predecessor IVy weighed under 150 kg , eVe weighs approximately 300 kg , with light carbon fiber monocoque construction and 15 kWh batteries weighing only 63 kg .
However , eVe has achieved a similar drag coefficient , despite different overall shape and larger frontal area .
The Bolivian President Evo Morales announced Thursday he will file legal charges against the United States President Barack Obama for crimes against humanity .
President Morales announced he was preparing litigation after Venezuelan President Nicholas Maduro 's plane was allegedly denied entry into U.S. airspace over Puerto Rico .
President Morales called Obama a `` criminal '' violating international law .
Morales called an emergency meeting of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States -LRB- CELAC -RRB- , made up of 33 member states including Argentina , Mexico and Chile , and encouraged member states to remove their ambassadors from the U.S. to show their solidarity .
He asked Bolivarian Alliance member states to boycott the next United Nations meeting , to be held in New York on September 24 .
He also said the U.S. had pursued a policy of `` intimidation '' and have a history of blockading presidential flights .
In July this year , the Bolivian presidential aircraft was prevented from landing in Portugal to refuel , allegedly at the request of the U.S. administration .
After Italy , Spain and France each banned the aircraft from entering their airspace , it was ultimately forced to land in Austria .
Here , the plane was boarded as part of the search for U.S. fugitive Edward Snowden .
Several Latin American heads of state promptly condemned the actions .
President Evo Morales is in his second presidential term after first being elected in 2005 .
He became internationally recognisable for the striped jumper he wore while meeting with high level dignitaries , including kings and presidents , around the world .
His actions as President have included halving his own salary and those of his ministers , seizing Bolivia 's gas and oil reserves , and redistributing the nation 's unused countryside to the poor .
President Morales had been bound for bilateral talks in China .
For its 98th consecutive year , the East Texas State Fair opened for operations on Friday in Tyler , Texas in the United States .
The event features brand new attractions including a high dive show , a wolf pack exhibit and an Old West exhibit .
According to fair officials , the event is projected to bring in roughly US$ 7.5 million in total receipts .
Heavy rains on Friday seemingly impacted the opening day attendance , with very few attendees present at 4pm local time .
On Thursday evening , members of the city 's Chamber of Commerce were treated to a preview of food offerings to be offered during the fair .
The menu included corn dogs and funnel cakes , longstanding fair staples .
The fair 's President stated that all fair employees are now subjected to drug screening before , during and after the fair .
The dive show 's owner and producer told Wikinews his show had some unusual setup obstacles to overcome , compared to other fair venues .
The show commonly uses giant concrete blocks as anchors for their dive tower , but for this fair , they had to anchor a portion of the tower to a tree , about 30 feet away .
The show 's tower stands eight stories high , with performers attempting to dive into a pool just 9.5 feet deep .
The Fremantle Dockers defeated the Sydney Swans 99 to 74 this past Saturday in their Australian Football League preliminary final at Patersons Stadium , Perth , Western Australia .
Fremantle will play the Hawthorn Hawks in their first Grand Final appearance in their 19 year history .
The 25 point win over the reigning premiers , Sydney , came as a result of an early push by the Dockers , who led by 39 points at half-time .
The Swans came to the game missing several key players , including Adam Goodes , who is recovering from a knee injury .
Yesterday , World Bank released its 2012 World Development Report on Gender Equality and Development .
India was mentioned over 300 times in the report , many more times than more developed countries like Spain which was mentioned 48 times , New Zealand which was mentioned 15 times , and Canada which was mentioned 22 times .
The report mentions the importance of gender equality for national development as it ties into improve productivity , improved outcomes for the next generation , and more representative decision making .
Across the board for India , improved gender equality on the local level led to improvements in sanitation , water supplies , irrigation , and schools .
Nationally , the report found that a woman 's income correlated positively with the number of years her children spent in school .
There is no gender gap in male/female school attendance for the richest 20 % of Indian families , but males outnumber females by a ratio of 5 to 1 for the poorest 20 % of Indian families .
Girls in the bottom 20 % on average only finish Grade 1 while males finish Grade 6 .
By age 15 , according to Young Lives , Indian parents from Andhra Pradesh prioritize family outcomes for their male children over their female ones .
Indian women earn $ 0.64 for every $ 1 earned by their male counterparts .
They fare better proportionally than their female German counterparts who earn $ 0.62 and Georgia who earn $ 0.60 .
In the developing world , they lag behind Malawi where women earn $ 0.90 for every $ 1 earned by men , Egypt where women earn $ 0.82 , and Benin and Mexico at $ 0.80 .
A fifth of married Indian women , including those with their own income , do not make decisions on household spending .
The 18 % average puts Indian female control of their earnings equal to their counterparts in Mozambique .
The report found that while it took 100 years for the average woman in the United States to go from having six children to having three , it took India only 35 years .
Women still have high maternal mortality rates , especially when compared to neighboring Sri Lanka .
Very young females still die at very high rates in India , especially in North India , because of gender preferences for male children .
While according to the report this trend is spreading nationally , the overall number of excess females deaths dropped by 8,000 from 265,000 in 1990 to 257,000 in 2008 .
In China , the total excess female deaths grew by 202,000 .
The report cites improved access to ultra-sound and similar technologies as a cause for the very high rates in both India and China because it allows parents to select the sex of their child .
Economic well being plays a role in the number of children a woman has .
The richest 20 % of women average around 1.5 total children .
The number is much lower than many Afrian countries including Niger , Mali , Zambia , Malawi , Liberia , Nigeria , Tanzania and Kenya where the poorest 20 % average over 7 children .
The Indian gains highlighted include several local ones .
This includes using women 's self-help groups focused on taking best practices from research and applying them in farming in the state of Orissa .
The Self Employed Women 's Association has assisted women in Gujarat by providing childcare .
Quotas for women elected in local governments led to changes in underlying beliefs about the effectiveness of women in government .
The creation of an all-women 's police force in Tamil Nadu led to increased reporting of crimes against women and general comfort in going to the police to report a problem .
The report offers several pieces of advice for Indian policy makers , including trying to change current role models to include more women who do not follow social norms .
It advises laws be created and enforced to prevent sex selection of children .
The report also encourages strengthening ownership and land rights , which should also address the agricultural productivity gender-gap .
Tuesday , World Bank released the 2012 World Development Report on Gender Equality and Development .
In discussing Iceland , it suggests mandatory paid parental leave for mother and father have played an important role in changing norms in the country .
Parents have a government mandated nine months leave , three for the mother , three for the father and three to to distribute between the two .
Leave is paid at 80 % of their wages .
The report describes the changes in gender relations in Iceland as `` promising '' in terms of impact at work and at home .
Iceland 's boys and girls mean scores for the Programme for International Student Assessment mathematics test were nearly identical with boys just edging out girls with both scores around 510 .
Girls outperformed boys on the literacy test with a mean score of approximately 525 to 480 .
Mortality rates in Iceland for 1,000 people aged 15 -- 60 sits at 56 , significantly better than the United States at 107 , China at 113 , India at 213 , Iraq at 285 , Afghanistan at 479 , Malawi at 481 and Zimbabwe at 772 .
The report cites the 1983 creation of the Women 's Alliance , an all women 's political party , as bringing additional attention to women 's issues and deliberately attempting to increase the representation of women in Icelandic politics .
On Tuesday the World Bank released the 2012 World Development Report on Gender Equality and Development .
For Jamaica the report highlights a number of negative gender issues for the nation 's men .
The report claims that getting an education in Jamaica is viewed as primarily a female activity .
This cultural attitude encourages males to leave school early .
In 2008 , girls outnumbered boys in secondary school by a ratio of 1.04:1 .
At the same time , boys were more likely to have to repeat a year of school .
Only 16 % of boys passed five or more Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate exams compared to 30 % of girls .
Boys outperformed girls only in vocational subjects and physics .
The report cites four key challenges in boys ' development identified by a national programme .
They are low self-esteem , limited future employment opportunities , lack of discipline , and masculine identities that eschew education .
A program in Jamaica uses cash incentives to encourage at-risk boys to stay in school ; other countries like Pakistan use cash incentives to encourage girls to stay in school .
Jamaica 's program has resulted an average increase in boys attending school by 0.5 days a month .
At the same time , fathers are urged to become more involved with their childrens ' schooling and changes are being made to the curriculum to make it `` more boy-friendly '' .
The report claims Jamaican definitions of masculinity also encourage more risky behavior , and sexual behaviors valuing achievement and competence above intimacy .
The report says these factors increase physical and sexual violence towards women .
Male mortality is increasing in Jamaica .
The report cites crime and violence as causes .
The United States is referred to many times , often as a benchmark to foster understanding of recent gains for women in other parts of the globe .
At the same time , United States women still lag behind US men in a number of areas .
In 2012 , the authors note women in the United States still face challenges economically and socially .
Jobs traditionally held by women also result in lower wages for men who hold these jobs .
Immigrants to the United States from Southeast Asia and India have higher than expected male to female birth ratios , which the report authors suggest is partially deliberate sex selection based on cultural attitudes from home countries .
The report suggests US men have greater pension assets than US women .
When compared to elderly US men , elderly women in the United States are more likely to live alone than with a spouse .
US women are disproportionately under-represented in local police forces , accounting for less than 20 % of all police officers .
Women in the United States also bear a higher percentage of housework duties than men at 61 % .
When US women take part time work while raising children , they find it difficult to use that work experience to gain future full time employment .
US women are disincentivized from re-entering the workforce after giving birth because of the high cost of childcare .
Many of the gains for United States women took place a while ago and took a long time to get .
It took 40 years , 1870 -- 1910 , to see major improvements in the percentage of girls aged 6 to 12 attending school .
In 1921 , after women got the right to vote in the United States , the United States Congress passed the Promotion of the Welfare and Hygiene of Maternity and Infancy Act .
This assisted in lowering infant mortality from 23 % to 15 % .
Many of the legislative victories for United States women came early compared to developing countries .
Property rights for women , while later than some of their European counterparts like Norway and the United Kingdom , started to come by 1848 .
That year , the Married Women 's Property Act was passed in New York .
Other states soon followed .
Women got suffrage on a state-by-state level in the country until they got federal suffrage in 1920 .
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 barred discrimination against women and allowed married women to make loans without their husband 's consent .
In 1980 , airlines were barred from discriminating against flight attendances for their marital status during the hiring and firing stage .
The number of United States respondents agreeing with the proposition `` a university education is more important for a boy than for a girl '' decreased from about 14 % in the period between 1994 and 1999 to about about 9 % in the period between 2005 and 2007 .
Similarly , the number of people who agreed with `` when jobs are scarce , men should have more right to a job than women '' decreased from 19 % to about 8 % over the same period .
Currently in the United States , females academically outperform their male counterparts in all academic areas including -LSB- -LSB- mathematics | math -RSB- and science .
US girls outperform boys on the literacy test with mean scores of approximately 510 to 490 .
In this regard , the report suggests US girls ' performance patterns resemble global ones .
Burkino Faso is worse , matching the United States in 1780 with a percentage of roughly 25 % .
For Fiji , the report focused on progress being made in the country as it relates to gender roles and the local impact of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women .
Girls from Fiji believe they can attain a university education .
In contrast , boys from rural areas in Fiji generally do not believe they will stay in school past the primary level .
The report attributes this to the need for boys to contribute to the family income .
Fijian girls are beginning to challenge these traditional cultural gender norms .
While they acknowledge and admire the hard work their mothers have done in the domestic sphere , they seek better education and opportunities .
While the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women -LRB- CEDAW -RRB- in 1979 , Fiji did not ratify it until August 1995 .
At first , Fiji objected for cultural reasons to one part of CEDAW , and said Constitutional sections containing different rules for men and women on their ability to marry foreigners was incompatible with another part .
These objections were eventually dropped and constitutional changes were made between 1997 and 1999 .
CEDAW helped bring about family law reform in 1995 .
A civil uprising in 2000 stalled some iniatives , but the 2002 CEDAW review assisted in reviving efforts .
In 2009 , the minimum age allowed for both men and women to marry was raised to 18 years .
Since the introduction of CEDAW , reforms have been made that allowed for more equal partners , make divorces easier to get , make it harder for women to be excluded from the home , and improve the amount , and enforced the payment , of spousal support and following a divorce .
The report notes that a 2010 review of CEDAW said there is still room for improvement in terms of inheritance rights for women .
Texas yesterday executed murder convict Arturo Diaz hours after the US Supreme Court turned down a final appeal .
He and co-defendant Joe Cordova were found guilty of the 1999 murder of Michael Ryan Nichols , stabbed 94 times over a $ 50 debt .
At trial a psychologist told the court Diaz had low IQ , childlike communications skills , and head injuries from fights and a car crash that were liable to `` impair his ability to control and regulate his judgment and perceive reality '' .
Lawyers for Diaz yesterday told the Supreme Court his defense had failed to ask relatives to tell the trial about Diaz 's childhood , during which he had antisocial tendencies , and was therefore deficient .
Lawyers also told the Supreme Court Diaz 's original appeal attorneys were also ineffectual , and that a possible plea bargain had not been properly explained to him .
The court rejected an argument that prior rulings meant Diaz and others with allegedly defective legal representation should have their cases reexamined .
Diaz and Nichols were at a party the night before when the victim borrowed $ 100 from a girl there ; he only repaid half .
Diaz and Cordova headed to the McAllen apartment where Nichols and a co-worker were staying .
Both were tied up with bedsheets and shoelaces and stabbed ; the co-worker survived by feigning death .
The offenders stole $ 50 and fled .
In addition to the surviving co-worker , who escaped the next morning after passing out overnight , another witness told the trial of helping the accused dispose of bloody clothing .
A beer bottle found at the scene had Diaz 's DNA on it .
Diaz was put on death row ; Cordova received a life sentence .
His death marks the thirteenth Texas execution this year with four more planned .
Texas previously used sodium thiopental but supplier Hospira ceased manufacturing it .
Used as an assisted suicide drug , pentobarbital is also hard to source with Danish manufacturer Lundbeck opposed to its product being used to execute .
State authorities refused to identify the supplier of the pentobarbital used yesterday , which replaces stocks of execution drugs that expired last month .
Earlier this week the World Bank released the 2012 World Development Report on Gender Equality and Development .
The report noted relatively high numbers of women participating in Finnish politics , and credited the Council for Equality between Men and Women in Finland with progress .
Although not specifically mentioned by the report , since the millennium the positions of President and Prime Minister have both been held by women ; Tarja Halonen became the nation 's first female President in 2000 and in 2010 Mari Kiviniemi was selected to be the second female Prime Minister .
Women gained suffrage in 1906 with little opposition , ahead of the US and UK .
The cross-party Council for Equality between Men and Women in Finland dates back to the 1970s ; the World Bank dismisses its role at that time as `` primarily symbolic '' with little in the way of staff , funding , or influence .
In the 1980s it was handed statutory power for gender equality issues and has gone on to press for reforms in areas including sex work , job training , and quotas on political representation .
The report calls the council a `` success '' .
Education , however , showed gender segregation by subject at the tertiary level ; Finland was one of several countries singled out as examples of high gender segregation in economically developed countries , compared to lower levels of segregation in less well-developed nations .
Females are ahead of men in tertiary education enrollment , with 46 % of men in the relevant age group enrolling in 1991 and 52 % of women .
By 2009 these numbers stood at 82 % and 101 % respectively .
Literacy also produced very high scores but with a gender gap ; boys averaged around 510 while girls averaged around 560 .
Internet access in Finland is high with men slightly ahead ; for men and women alike access stands at around 85 % .
Finns have a legal right to a 1Mbps broadband connection and authorities plan to have 100Mbps connections for every citizen by 2015 .
The proportion of women teleworking at least 25 % of the time has risen from around 7 % in 2000 -- 1 to 9 % in 2005 ; the male figure was at 9 % in 2005 and is now 15 -- 20 % .
Rapid teleworking growth is a global trend but the report notes the female figures generally grew faster .
Marketplace activities also show gender disparity in Finland .
Of activities performed by men and women , the female share stands at 41 % , versus 63 % for domestic activities such as housework .
From 2006 -- 9 services accounted for 87 % of female and 56 % of male employment .
10 % of women and 37 % of men were employed in industry and agriculture was only a minor employer , with 6 % of male employment and 3 % of female employment .
Life expectancy for Finnish men has risen from 71 years in 1990 to 77 years in 2009 ; in the same period , women 's life expectancy increased from 79 years to 83 years .
The population stands at 5 million , representing a 0.4 % annual growth rate from 2000 to 2010 .
The goal came in the tenth minute after a pass from Koke .
The goal was Costa 's eighth in this season of La Liga , and ended Real Madrid 's 30-plus -- game home winning streak .
The home team crowd responded to Costa 's play with chants of `` Costa is not Spanish . ''
A review this week by Wikinews of US Consumer Financial Protection Bureau -LRB- CFPB -RRB- complaints about student loans in the United States shows Sallie Mae leads all lending institutions in complaints .
Of the 4,851 complaints dating back to March 2012 when the CFPB first began collecting student loan data , 2,262 or 46.6 % of all complaints were about the lender .
The other major lenders in this space include Wells Fargo , JP Morgan Chase , PNC , and Discover .
In complaints , AES/PHEAA came in second with 546 , or 11.3 % of all complaints .
Wells Fargo , Citibank and JPMorgan Chase each had between 5 % and 7.5 % of all complaints , totaling 918 complaints between them .
78 other lending institutions round out the list of organizations with complaints filed against them for student loans .
Few of the complaints originate from people with problems with federal student loans .
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau sorts complaints into three issues : Problems when you are unable to pay , Repaying your loan , and Getting a loan .
Sallie Mae led in total complaints in this category with 1467 .
CFPB says loan repayment issues include a basket of claim types including `` fees , billing , deferment , forbearance , fraud , and credit reporting . ''
Many of the complaints are , according to the CFPB , because borrowers have difficulty getting deferrments on loan repayment as a result of being unable to find employment .
The company 's performance this year compared to last year has been mixed .
April , May , July and August all saw increases of 17 -- 43 .
Of the top six lenders by volume of complaints , only AES/PHEAA and Citibank saw drops every month between March and September from the total volume in the previous year .
Discover saw an increase every month from the same period last year except for September .
Most , 1470 , of the complaints against Sallie Mae were closed with explanations .
2.1 % were closed with relief and 12.1 % were closed without relief .
40.1 % of AES/PHEAA 's 546 complaints were closed with non-monetary relief , 35.3 % were closed with explanations and 21.2 % were closed without relief .
Of the eight lending institutions with 100 or more complaints filed against them , Discover was the institution most likely to result in a closure with monetary relief with 12.9 % of all their closures ending this way .
Complaints over student loan lenders were geographically distributed , coming from 3,447 different zip codes .
The largest cluster of complaints is for 20001 , a Washington D.C. zip code with 10 complaints originating from there .
Rounding out the bottom five states by volume of complaints , Mississippi had 11 .
07950 , the zip code for Morris Plains , New Jersey , and 37013 , the zip code for Antioch , Tennessee , each had 8 complaints originating from them .
By volume of complaints by state , New York led with 497 , with California second with 467 , Pennsylvania third with 303 , Florida fourth with 288 and Ohio fifth with 219 complaints .
US Territories largely occupied the bottom spots .
Since mortgages complaints were recorded in December 2011 , 77,622 total have been added to CFPB 's database .
29.2 % of these complaints involved Bank of America , with the second most received by Wells Fargo , accounting for 15.5 % of all complaints .
JPMorgan Chase ranked third by volume of complaints with 9.8 % .
The remaining 14.4 % of all complaints about consumer mortgages were divided between about 530 other lending institutions .
Wells Fargo matched national trends for volume of complaints by month , with the exception of the current month being the lowest on record for number of complaints with 197 compared to the next lowest month , December 2011 , when they had 221 .
April of this year was the next highest month with 493 complaints , edging out May of last year with 488 complaints .
According to the US Federal Reserve , debt for family residences stands at US$ 10.706 trillion for the second quarter of 2013 .
The mortgage complaints in the CFPB report include several subproducts .
Conventional fixed mortgages account for 27.1 % of all complaints .
Conventional adjustable mortgages account for 10.0 % .
FHA mortgages account for 7.7 % of all complaints .
The remaining 48.7 % of complaints are about other mortgages or other mortgage issues .
A few years ago , FHA loans accounted for about 10 % of all US mortgages while VA loans accounted for about 3 % .
Prime loans accounted for over 75 % of the market and the rest were subprime mortgages .
California leads all states by volume of complaints with 14768 .
When complaints are divided by a state 's total population , New Hampshire leads .
The state is followed by Washington D.C. , Maryland , Georgia and Florida .
Complaints do not correlate with national rankings for August 's foreclosure rate by state where Nevada topped the list , followed by Florida , Ohio , Maryland and Delaware .
Two zip codes account for over 1,000 total complaints between them .
565 complaints originated in the 48382 zip code , which is in Commerce Township , Michigan , located in suburban Detroit .
553 complaints originated in the 33071 zip code , in Coral Springs , Florida .
According to real estate website Zillow , there are currently 1,033 properties in foreclosure in Coral Springs while Commerce Township only has 131 properties currently in foreclosure .
Four other zip codes have 100 plus complaints originating from them .
The CFPB categorizes complaints into six categories : `` Loan modification , collection , foreclosure '' or problems when a person is unable to pay ; `` Loan servicing , payments , escrow account '' or problems with making a payment ; `` Application , originator , mortgage broker '' ; `` Credit decision / Underwriting '' ; `` Settlement process and costs '' , and `` Other '' .
The CFPB says the complaint types indicate consumers `` appear to be driven by a desire to seek agreement with their companies on foreclosure alternatives .
The complaints indicate that consumer confusion persists around the process and requirements for obtaining loan modifications and refinancing , especially regarding document submission timeframes , payment trial periods , allocation of payments , treatment of income in eligibility calculations , and credit bureau reporting during the evaluation period . ''
Currently , 59.6 % of all complaints against lenders deal with being unable to pay .
Problems with payment accounted for the second largest area of complaints , with Ocwen having the largest percentage of complaints at 31.9 % and Bank of America having the smallest at 18.8 % .
Nationally , complaints reached a high of 5,840 for January 2013 , 1,107 more than the next highest month of April 2013 .
The total emerging for September is the second lowest since records were first kept in December 2011 .
On a state by state level , this pattern largely repeats with a major exception for Florida which saw a peak of 849 complaints in June 2012 .
The national January spike came as the Qualified Mortgage standard required by the The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 came into play .
It required mortgage lenders to take steps to insure borrowers could repay their mortgages .
Following three weeks of talks , the leader of Høyre , Norway 's Conservative Party , Erna Solberg announced today that the Conservatives will form a minority government in a right-wing coalition with the Progress Party .
The coalition government plans to change policy on immigration and asylum , reduce inheritance tax , and reform provision of healthcare and pensions .
The parties also agreed to not allow drilling for oil on Jan Mayen Island or in the Lofoten archipelago .
The Norwegian Oil and Gas Association said the decision was `` disappointing and undemocratic '' .
Solberg said that she intends to continue working with other parties .
The new government is due to take office on October 18 .
Solberg will replace the current Labor Party Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg .
In a speech to the Conservative Party conference in Manchester , Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne said : `` Provided we can find the savings to pay for it , I want to freeze fuel duty for the rest of this Parliament . ''
The fuel duty rise had been scheduled for next September .
This announcement follows a similar cancellation of a planned fuel duty rise in the Chancellor 's March Budget which would have come into force in September .
Party aides said the plan would save motorists # 750m a year , with petrol prices 20p a litre cheaper than they would have been if plans by Labour had been followed .
Edmund King from The Automobile Association welcomed the announcement on fuel duty , but said : `` it is worth remembering that every time there is a spike in fuel prices , the Chancellor brings in money due to the 20 per cent VAT -LSB- Value Added Tax -RSB- rate on petrol and diesel .
This is not exactly a give-away , as even with a duty freeze the Chancellor is still raking in approximately 60 per cent of the pump price in duty and VAT . ''
Osborne also announced that he intends to end the deficit by 2020 and wants to keep the nation 's finances at a surplus .
This would be accomplished by a new round of cuts after the election amounting to # 25 billion .
Provided the recovery is sustained , our goal is to achieve that surplus in the next parliament .
That is going to require discipline and spending control . ''
Labour MP and Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury , Rachel Reeves , said Osborne 's fuel duty plans were `` panicky '' and an `` aspiration '' without funding .
Reeves said of Osborne 's plans regarding the deficit : `` nobody will believe a word he says '' .
May argued that European human rights law had prevented the deportation of Abu Qatada to Jordan , and that the guarantee of a `` right to a family life '' had become a `` free-for-all '' for appeals against deportation .
The Conservatives have also faced questions about their relationship with the UK Independence Party -LRB- UKIP -RRB- .
Nigel Farage , leader of UKIP , attended the Conservative conference and raised the question of deals between UKIP and the Conservatives at a local level .
A number of Conservative MPs have said that the Conservatives and UKIP should work together during the election including Bill Cash , Douglas Carswell , and Peter Bone .
Senior leaders in the Conservative Party have rejected any suggestion of working closer with UKIP .
George Osborne said : `` The only candidates who will stand for the Conservative party at the election are Conservative candidates -- a sort of statement of the obvious . ''
On Tuesday , South Korea staged a huge military parade to mark its armed forces ' 65th anniversary in a display of long-range missiles considered a direct threat to North Korea .
Wikinews interviewed several specialists about the parade 's possible significance .
However , this parade has not been done for many years and resumed this year indicating -LSB- the -RSB- Park government would not tolerate any hostile action by North Korea .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- South Korea 's President , Park Geun-hye , has warned of a `` very grave '' threat posed by North Korea .
Would a military parade like this be more likely to encourage hostile behaviour ?
Kelly : Not really , because NK already engages in so much hostile behavior it is hard to know how much more restraint SK show .
My own sense is that SK demonstrates remarkable forbearance in the face of NK threats .
If one thinks of how , e.g. , the US or Israel would respond to such threats , SK looks downright gentle .
So SK needs to signal both that it does not seek escalation , but also that it can not be bullied .
It 's a tough balancing act , and this parade is to send that second message .
North Korean behavior is difficult to predict with any fidelity .
The military parade , while it shows potential capacity , is a fundamentally passive -LRB- rather than active or reactive -RRB- form of behavior .
It 's tit for tat , and both sides either maintain the balance or one or the other loses face .
It would take much more than a parade for actual conflict to erupt .
Terry : No , not in the long run although this kind of a military parade might provoke temporary , short-term hostile behavior by the North .
North Korea already criticized -LSB- the -RSB- Park government about the recent parade and very bold move by the Park Government in negotiating family reunion and resuming of Diamond Mountains .
However , I do not believe that North Korea will take any hostile action since the US Secretary of State , Kerry , is proposing North Korea a peaceful dialogue .
Kosal : Secretary of Defense Hagel 's presence , along with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Martin Dempsey , shows the commitment of the United States to support its ally .
The US is also strongly committed to limiting proliferation of nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons .
Their presence reinforces that to the North Koreans as well as to the international community .
South Koreans depend on it and the US takes care to show support .
Chi : Certainly he is there to add symbolic strength to the alliance which tended to be weakened until recently .
Behind his presence is the recent agreement to reconsider the planed transfer of the war-time operation control from the UN/US to the Korean army .
You : US -- South Korea alliance is strong but it is a bit more complicated since -LSB- the -RSB- US is supporting Japan in arming in naval forces to check China , which is a great concern for South Korea and -LSB- the -RSB- South Korean people .
This might cause some issues in US -- South Korea alliance .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- North Korea 's rhetoric vows the repeated bolstering of its nuclear arsenal to what it calls US military threats .
Do you think a military parade of this type backed by the US is likely to influence further hostility ?
NK has no reason to exist as a separate , poorer Korean state , just as the GDR -LSB- East Germany -RSB- had no post-cold war reason to exist , unless SK and the US can be regularly described as the enemy .
So NK does n't want a war , but they certainly do n't want a warm peace , as then NK then loses its raison d'etre .
They are more for internal DPRK -LSB- North Korea -RSB- efforts to keep its own population in tune with government policies .
Incapable of competing with economically flourishing South Korea , the North relies on bolstering its nuclear arsenal and on military and political brinkmanship to make up ground .
As a matter of fact , North Korea is very anxious to escape from the current gridlock and -LSB- the -RSB- US and South Korea do not give them plenty of reasons to go to the negotiating table .
The NKs would lose such a war , decisively in fact , and the NK elite would face the hangman in the South afterward .
A year or two ago there was a naval incident that occurred in the West Sea , but both sides separated quickly , although the North shelled an island claimed by both the DPRK and the ROK .
When I was active there since 1964 , I taught Korean history and culture , emphasizing the traditional periods of Korea 's earlier history .
Terry : The North 's latest tactic -- to return to diplomacy after provoking Seoul and Washington earlier this year -- does not mean that the North has abandoned its timeworn brinkmanship strategy nor that it has shifted its nuclear policy .
The North is likely to pursue more aggressive action down the road , attempting to ratchet up another sense of crisis , if it determines that its current peace ploy is not getting the concessions it seeks from Seoul .
But while the North may provoke Seoul again with border skirmishes , or another missile or nuclear test , I think it will avoid direct military action with Seoul that will escalate to an all-out conflict .
Again , Pyongyang will not risk outright hostilities that will lead to an all-out war .
At the time of North Korean attack on Yeonpyeong Island in November 2011 , the South Korean Government made an official pledge to retaliate against any future military actions by North Korea .
The government will face grave political consequences if it fails to live up to its own words .
There is always a possibility of direct military actions but they will be more or less contained to a local level .
That is simply not going to happen no matter how many SK and US political figures demand it .
So now , SK must show that it can keep up and match , if not outrace , the NKs .
It 's good to remind the North of Seoul 's capabilities , although as I said before , Kim Jong-un , like his father and grandfather before him , already knows any all-out conflict would result in the destruction of his regime .
Certainly , the Park government wants to rectify it .
Liberal states should not really be flashing their hardware in a strutting , provocative way like this .
NK -LSB- North Korea -RSB- tries pretty regularly to bully SK , and as its nuclear and missile programs advance , SK deterrence become ever more important .
So parades like this are a way of SK saying ` do n't mess with us even though you have nukes . '
The underlying capacity supports the newly announced bilateral tailored deterrence strategy between South Korea and the United States .
The military parade served to transparently show , in a largely passive/non-offensive/non-reactionary way , the capacity to follow through on that strategy that is directed at North Korea 's offensive nuclear weapons , offensive chemical weapons , and offensive biological weapons programs rather than a more general deterrence strategy .
The specific declaratory policy highlights South Korea 's responsibility to `` continue to build reliable inter-operable response capabilities and to develop the Korean Air and Missile Defense system . ''
These are largely passive defense measures to minimize the effects of a North Korean offensive attack and to reduce vulnerability of South Korean forces and civilians .
While not commonly observed in the US , parades like this are not atypical for East Asia , particularly in conjunction with significant anniversaries .
In this case , the parade also marked the 65th anniversary of the Republic of Korea -LSB- South Korea -RSB- Armed Forces .
It has long been routine for both Koreas to compete in the headlines .
Terry : President Park is trying to make it clear to the North that this time , under her watch , Seoul is now serious about responding to future provocations by the North .
South Korea 's display of its missiles is meant to deter the North , to show the North that any provocation in the future would be met with strong retaliation .
Yet the display of the cruise missiles in the recent parade is designed to achieve specific purposes .
One is obviously targeting at the North Korean regime as a warning for possible pre-emptive strikes on their conventional and nuclear missile sites .
The other target is South Korean citizens who have been increasingly agitated about the possession of WMDs by its Northern counterpart and want to see some guarantee from their own government .
Hence the parade is not only for displaying its military capabilities to its enemies but it is also playing a psychological game with its own people .
Yet , Hyunmoo-3c , one of the cruise missiles displayed in the event , signals that the South Korean government 's perspective is no longer limited to the Korean peninsula .
Hyunmoo-3c 's range of 1,500 km indicates that the Korean military oversees the entire Northeast Asian region as its strategic theatre .
The bestselling US novelist Tom Clancy died yesterday in a hospital in Baltimore , according to his publisher .
The sixty-six year old is best known for a series of novels themed around espionage , military affairs and geopolitical intrigue , many of which have been adapted into movies and video games .
The Hunt for Red October , Clancy 's first novel , sold over five million copies and was made into a movie with Alec Baldwin and Sean Connery .
President Ronald Reagan described the novel as a `` perfect yarn '' .
The protagonist of Red October , CIA analyst Jack Ryan , starred in a series of Clancy adventures featuring wars , terrorist attacks and international political power games .
Ryan has been played by Harrison Ford and later Ben Affleck .
Seventeen of his twenty novels have reached number one on the New York Times bestseller list .
In 2002 , Forbes magazine estimated Clancy 's earnings at US$ 47.8 m. His final novel , Command Authority , is to be published in December .
Yesterday , a spokesperson for the 2014 Games said , `` All Commonwealth nations and territories are entitled to compete in the Commonwealth Games .
Glasgow 2014 has received confirmation from the Commonwealth Games Federation of the formal withdrawal of The Gambia from the Commonwealth .
It is our understanding , therefore , that The Gambia does not intend to enter a team and compete in next year 's Games . ''
The organizers are planning to modify the Queen 's Baton Relay to remove Gambia .
The relay traditionally involves the baton travelling to all participating countries .
With the exceptions of September 29 with 15 complaints and September 28 with 23 , it is the lowest daily total since March 16 of this year when 36 total complaints were recorded and February 23 of this year with 14 .
Of the 69 filed complaints recorded so far this month , 27 were complaints about mortgage companies , 21 were about bank accounts and 10 were about credit card companies .
40 % of credit card companies complaints , 42.9 % of bank account complaints and 48.1 % of mortgage complaints are currently listed as still in progress .
Most of the rest have been closed with an explanation .
Bank of America leads all companies in terms of total complaints filed this month with 9 .
During the government shutdown , some CFPB staff have voiced their opinions on Twitter .
Dan Munz , deputy assistant director for consumer engagement at the CFPB , tweeted , `` Boy , shutdown week has really created a sudden bumper crop of amateur federal management experts . ''
; `` Also , seems like Boehner is singlehandedly undoing whatever progress he 'd made in portraying this as a Dem -LSB- Democratic Party -RSB- shutdown . ''
; and `` Basically , there 's now a strong incentive to fill legislation with minor symbolic things you can bargain away later to protect the core . ''
The agency has been able to stay open during the government shutdown because it is funded by the Federal Reserve .
According to Amanda Terkel at the Huffington Post , Republican members of the United States House of Representatives have put closing the CFPB on their wish list of items in negotiating for a new debt ceiling limit .
Party members have previously stalled the appointment of Richard Cordray as the CFPB boss as a way of hindering it from engaging in oversight of financial organizations in the the US .
Tuesday , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development -LRB- OECD -RRB- , a 34 member international economic organization founded in 1961 that traces its origins back to the World War II-era Marshall Plan , published results on the state of adult skills in 24 countries , most of them European .
Internationally , Spain ranks second to last amongst surveyed countries for literacy proficiency amongst adults .
Spain , at 20.3 % , has one of the highest percentages of their population at reading proficiency level 1 .
This means adults have a basic understanding of what they read , can fill out forms , and can understand the meaning of sentences .
When below level 1 is added , the total comes to 27.5 % of the population at the lowest reading proficiency level .
Overall , Spain 's mean reading proficiency score puts them on par with Italy .
Amongst young adults aged 16 to 24 years , Spain ranks second to last amongst surveyed countries , with a mean score comparable to Italy , England , and Northern Ireland , and Cyprus .
Spain ranks last amongst all surveyed countries in numeracy proficiency amongst adults aged 16 to 65 years .
When only 16 to 24 year-olds are included , Spain 's overall relative performance increases by two spots , as a result of beating out Italy and the United States .
Individual performance on numeracy and literacy correlates highly in Spain at 0.887 .
The percentage of adults who have completed university in Spain is slightly under the global average for people aged 25 to 34 years , and significantly below average for people aged 55 to 65 years .
Spain finishes near the bottom of surveyed countries based on reading skills required at work .
Only the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Poland , and Italy require less use of reading skills at work .
From 2005 to 2010 , there was an increase from around 25 % to around 35 % in the number of individuals using the Internet to interact with government in Spain .
In the same period , business interaction with governments in Spain increased from about 55 % to about 65 % .
Spain 's percentage of foreign-born residents rose from around 3 % in 1995 to about 14 % in 2009 .
The results are based on a survey of 166,000 adults from Australia , Austria , Flanders , Canada , the Czech Republic , Denmark , Estonia , Finland , France , Germany , Ireland , Italy , Japan , South Korea , the Netherlands , Norway , Poland , Slovakia , Spain , Sweden , England , Northern Ireland , the United States , Cyprus , and Russia .
The British government have rejected a proposed plan for press self-regulation from a group of newspaper publishers and have said they intend to proceed with a Royal Charter supported by the three main political parties .
The culture secretary Maria Miller said Tuesday in the House of Commons the proposal by the newspaper industry failed to implement fundamental parts of the recommendations of the Leveson Inquiry into behaviour and ethical standards of the press last year .
Miller announced the final draft of the Charter will become availble on Friday following revisions by the political parties , and will be discussed by the Privy Council on October 30 .
The proposals offered by the newspapers and the government differ on implementation details on the regulator that would replace the Press Complaints Commission .
The newspapers wish to allow former editors of newspapers to serve on the `` recognition panel '' which would supervise the operation of the regulator while the government wishes to forbid former editors .
The government wish to prevent serving newspaper editors from being on the appointments committee for the regulator while the press proposal seeks to require one of the four members of the committee to represent the press industry .
The government proposal seeks to make it so the Royal Charter can be amended by Parliament , with a two-thirds majority from both houses , while the press proposal gives industry trade bodies a say on changes to the Charter .
In both proposals , an arbitration service would be provided as an alternative to going to court , but the government wishes to make the arbitration service free for claimants while the newspapers want it to be `` inexpensive '' because they believe free arbitration could lead to a rush in claims going to arbitration .
Both proposals would allow the regulator to fine the industry up to # 1 million and demand the prominent publication of corrections and apologies to news stories .
The Hacked Off campaign welcomed the rejection of the industry proposals .
A spokesman described the proposals as `` a wrecking manouevre by unrepentant sections of the press trying to avoid accountability and carry on with a broken system of press regulation '' but condemned the delays in implementation : `` Ten months after the publication of the Leveson Report and seven months after all parties in parliament endorsed its recommendations in a Royal Charter , there can be no legitimate excuse for yet another delay . ''
The newspaper industry continue to express concern regarding the proposals .
Trevor Kavanagh , a columnist for the Sun , said that the `` major issue here is keeping the freedom of the press out of the sticky fingers of the politicians who want to control it '' .
Movie actor Hugh Grant , a director of Hacked Off , rejected criticism of the charter from the press , arguing the press object to the system because `` when the press gets things wrong and harms people unfairly , the charter system will give those people a much better chance of redress .
It will provide free or at least very cheap arbitration , instead of requiring people whose rights have been breached to pay mountainous high court legal bills .
Grant goes on to argue that the press have attempted to reform the `` old , discredited '' Press Complaints Commission which Lord Leveson had found not fit for purpose .
Instead , he argues , the press should welcome the new regulator as a protection from libel as joining in means `` their journalists will have better protection from legal bullying by corporations and oligarchs .
Because litigants are pushed towards cheap arbitration it will no longer be possible for the very wealthy to gag reporters simply by threatening high court actions .
The court costs would fall to the libel bully . ''
Friday , October 11 , 2013 The 2013 Autumn Old and Antique Bookfair -LRB- -LRB- es -RRB- -RRB- Spanish language : Feria de Otoño del Libro Viejo y Antiguo continued on Paseo de Recoletos in Madrid , Spain yesterday with an outdoor temperature around 21C/70F and no precipitation .
Running from September 26 until October 13 , the first stalls are found near Plaza de Cibeles and continue to Calle Prim , running in a straight line down Paseo de Recoletos in the pedestrian walk in the center of the road .
The antique and old books fair is in its twenty-fifth edition and is one of several large bookfairs that occurs annually in Spain .
While not widely known internationally , the festival of books is known nationally .
Organized by The Libris Antique Books Association -LRB- -LRB- es -RRB- -RRB- Spanish language : La Asociación de Libreros de Viejo Libris in collaboration with the Madrid City Council , 39 book vendors are selling books at the fair from across various regions of the country including Madrid , Valencia and Zaragoza .
The poster for the event was designed by Madrid comic artist Alfonso Azpiri .
Tourists were evacuated from Paris ' Eiffel Tower just before 4:00 pm -LRB- 1800 GMT -RRB- yesterday following a threatening phone call .
Security forces covered the area after the phone call was received and the Eiffel Tower was reopened about an hour and half later after the threats were dismissed .
Threats and evacuations are a recurring problem for Paris ' famous landmark and marks the fourth evacuation for 2013 .
On August 9 and March 31 , the monument was closed due similar circumstances after Police responded to bomb alerts .
On June 18 , the attraction was closed when a man threatened to throw himself off the edge of the tower .
Police have not given any further information regarding the evacuation .
32,000 tourists visit the Eiffel Tower every day making it the most visited monument in the world .
The protest took place on the outskirts of the city to oppose alleged electoral fraud during the most recent presidential election that returned President Ilham Aliyev to office for his third consecutive term .
The protesters accused the government of voter intimidation and ballot stuffing , and were rallying in a demand for a new poll .
According to Reuters , some protesters were beaten and detained by police .
Interfax-Azerbaijan reported approximately 10 people were detained during the protest .
Around 115 pilgrims were killed Sunday in a stampede in India 's Madhya Pradesh region .
Some 50,000 pilgrims were attempting to visit the Ratangarh temple as part of an annual Hindu festival .
Sources indicate that rumors spread through the crowd that the bridge over the Sindh River could collapse , which caused widespread panic .
The rumor provoked a stampede in which many people were trampled and others sought escape by jumping into the river , actions which resulted in many drownings .
The death toll includes 30 children and may rise as bodies are recovered and patients in critical condition are monitored .
Several pilgrims died on way to hospital .
The toll may rise manifold , '' a senior police officer told The Times of India .
At least another 100 people were injured during the incident .
A traffic jam leading to the temple caused rescue vehicles and medical teams to be delayed .
The bridge involved in this stampede has recently been rebuilt following a similar incident in 2007 .
The Church of Wells , based in the small town of Wells , Texas has been at the center of significant media activity in recent days .
Wikinews spoke with a Tyler , Texas minister who had an encounter with Church of Wells members recently .
In the media , reports have surfaced surrounding Catherine Grove , a 26 year-old Arkansas woman who recently joined the Church of Wells .
Grove 's parents and other family say they 've hardly communicated with her since July .
Grove 's parents have been in Wells since July , hoping to have a chance to speak with her directly .
The Tyler minister explained to Wikinews , he and several of his church members were distributing food and water to homeless citizens in downtown Tyler when they were accosted by members of the group .
The Church of Wells ' group 's leader became `` very agitated '' and yelled at the minister and his parishioners .
The minister said he recognized the Church of Wells members from recent news coverage .
He replied , `` Do n't call me brother .
I do n't think you and I serve the same Christ . ''
He reported the Church of Wells leader also insulted one of the other church 's volunteers , stating , `` Look at you .
The minister reported the Church of Wells members even followed his group on foot for about two city blocks , and began yelling and hurling insults at them when they arrived at the city 's square plaza .
When asked if he believes the Church of Wells to be a cult , the minister replied , `` The way they were yelling and the leader seemingly believed that our church member absolutely had to share his testimony aloud with him , specifically him , that 's why I can say with comfort that this group is a cult .
I believe the man thinks he is a prophet . ''
All the women dressed the same .
Often , when someone begins to feel as if they 're losing traction on an argument , they 'll often shift over into name calling . ''
The minister continued , `` As we were about to leave , -LSB- the Church of Wells group leader -RSB- said , ` Prophets of God are not to be mocked . '
Andrew Mitchell resigned from his job in the Cabinet as Chief Whip following an incident in September 2012 at Downing Street .
Mitchell had been told he could not ride his bicycle in Downing Street .
The next day , The Sun newspaper reported Mitchell had sworn at the police officers and called them `` plebs '' .
Mitchell agreed he had been rude to the officers and apologised but denied he had used the word `` plebs '' .
A police log was later leaked to The Daily Telegraph which claimed Mitchell had told the officers to `` learn -LSB- their -RSB- fucking place '' and referred to them as `` fucking plebs '' .
The current controversy regards a meeting between Andrew Mitchell and officers and representatives of the Police Federation , the union for police officers .
The officers claim Mitchell did not disclose the precise words he said during the altercation .
A tape by Mitchell has since emerged of this meeting which casts doubt on this claim .
An investigation by the IPCC ruled on Tuesday that the officers involved should face gross misconduct proceedings as there was evidence they had deliberately set out to discredit Mitchell .
The report , and the revelation that Mitchell 's taped version of the conversation does not match the police accounts , has led to senior figures in the government to call for the Police to apologise to Mitchell .
David Cameron said of Mitchell : `` He is owed an apology .
Conservative minister Greg Clark told the BBC that David Cameron should reinstate Mitchell .
Home Secretary Theresa May said the behaviour of the police in the Mitchell affair threatened the public 's trust in the police .
Sir Hugh Orde from the Association of Chief Police Officers said the chief constables need to be given chance to explain their reasons for not engaging in further disciplinary action : `` It seems to me in this case there is no issue that the finding by the police service was the officers ' behaviour fell below the standard .
The question is the quantum of seriousness and I think that 's why the chief constables are clearly determined to explain that . ''
Sarvis has garnered double digits in opinion polls for the 2013 Virginia gubernatorial election , an unusual feat for a third party candidate .
The latest Newsmax/Zogby poll from late September placed him at 13 percent , 14 points behind Republican Party nominee Ken Cuccinelli , Virginia 's Attorney General , and 19 points behind Democratic Party nominee Terry McAuliffe , the former Democratic National Committee chairman , with 24 percent undecided .
Whoever wins election on November 5 , 2013 , would replace outgoing governor Bob McDonnell .
On his campaign website , Sarvis notes he favors parental school choice through student vouchers , simplification of Virginia 's Tax Code , US Second Amendment -- gun -- rights , same-sex marriage , and reform of the state 's drug laws .
With Wikinews , Sarvis discusses his background , views on McDonnell 's tenure , keys to campaign success , plan to implement his agenda , and the former Virginia governor he most admires .
Robert Sarvis : I am the only candidate born and raised in Virginia , but also the only candidate who embodies both physically and philosophically the growing diversity of the commonwealth .
Because of my academic and professional background , I understand the issues and challenges facing Virginia much better than the other candidates , and I am offering real solutions that can be appreciated across the political spectrum .
I am the only candidate who believes in both economic freedom and personal liberty and the only candidate who stands on principle against cronyism and corporatism and in favor of the rule of law .
Sarvis : McDonnell did well early in his term pushing back against Senate Democrats who wanted huge tax increases in response to major revenue shortfalls during the recession .
Sarvis : Voters see the two-party system for the sham it has become .
Voters see the two major party nominees as exemplifying what is worst about their respective parties , and they want something better .
Voters who meet me and hear me speak know that I am sincere , know that I understand the issues deeply and have workable solutions , and know that I stand on principle against cronyism and corporatism and in favor of the rule of law and the public interest .
Sarvis : There are precedents of independent governors dealing effectively with the legislature , and indeed a wise third-party governor can have greater effectiveness than a major party governor .
Libertarians share many policy positions with each of the major parties .
Moreover , electing a third-party governor represents a repudiation of politics as usual , and the major party legislators will face changed constraints and incentives , meaning that much more is possible than many people assume , especially with strong leadership .
The ACT Legislative Assembly passed the legalising bill 8 -- 7 , with seven Australian Labor Party members being joined by the ACT Greens ' Member of the Legislative Assembly -LRB- MLA -RRB- , Shane Rattenbury .
ACT Attorney-General Simon Corbell made a series of last-minute amendments to ensure that the bill would survive a possible court challenge .
The legislation allows same-sex couples from all over Australia to marry in the ACT .
Chief Minister Katy Gallagher said the government would strive toward treating everyone equally and fairly under the law depite the threat of legal challenge .
Gay Deputy Chief Minister Andrew Barr spoke with feeling about the impact the legislation would have on same-sex couples .
Local Federal Member of Parliament Andrew Leigh , a strong supporter of rights for same-sex couples , applauded the bill , but Prime Minister of Australia Tony Abbott has indicated his government will challenge the bill in the High Court of Australia .
Abbot 's sister Christine Forster , a Liberal Party Sydney City Councillor , who is gay , called for Liberals at the federal level to be allowed a conscience vote .
The ACT previously passed a bill providing for civil unions in 2006 , which was disallowed by the Governor General of Australia on the advice of then-Prime Minister John Howard .
The bill was passed again after Howard lost office in 2007 , but marriage-like provisions were removed from the act under threat of being disallowed by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd .
Rudd now supports same-sex marriage .
This avenue for disallowing ACT legislation was closed in 2011 , when Greens Senator Bob Brown initiated a reform bill taking away the Governor General 's ability to disallow territory bills .
At present , Tony Abbott does not command a majority in the Senate , so a High Court challenge is an easier option than legislation .
The Constitution of Australia , Section 51 -LRB- xxi -RRB- , gives the Commonwealth government -- federal government -- power to make laws with respect to marriage .
The Howard government amended the Commonwealth Marriage Act in 2004 to exclude gay marriages .
Following incorrect statements by media organizations that include Fox News and the New York Post earlier in the week that the US Marine Corps were changing their hats in order to make them more gender neutral , the Corps issued a statement yesterday countering the claim , saying they are only changing the dress hat for women .
In a statement on their website , they said this change is only `` for female Marines because the current manufacturer is going out of business '' .
Commandant of the Marine Corps General James F. Amos is quoted in the Corps statement as saying , `` the President in no way , shape or form directed the Marine Corps to change our uniform cover . ''
The quote follows media claims the US President directed the Marine Corps to make a change to a more `` girly '' dress hat .
The women 's hats were made by a different manufacturer than the men 's hat .
At the same time , the US Department of Defense also asked the Corps to develop a more unisex option for both dress and service hats .
In preparation for a quarterly meeting of the Marine Corps Uniform Board scheduled for next week , a survey was sent out asking for feedback on whether women 's hats should be made to more closely model the current men 's dress hat or if all Marines should switch to the Dan Daly cap .
Other changes in the US military uniforms are scheduled to take place by the end of the year .
In the Navy , flame-resistant variant coveralls are scheduled to be introduced in December of this year .
Admiral Bill Gortney , the head of Fleet Forces Command , is quoted in the Marine Corps Times as saying .
And so this fills in that particular need .
During the early part of the month , there were some concerns about the quality of flu reporting as the CDC and other government supported flu tracking organizations were impacted by the US government shutdown .
Some non-profits and private organizations provided their own data during this period to fill the information void .
The CDC advises people to get a flu vaccine as the best means of avoiding getting the flu .
Dr. Harry Leider , Chief Medical Officer for Walgreens , also is encouraging people to get the flu vaccine now before the flu becomes more widespread .
One provides immunization for two influenza A viruses and an influenza B virus -- specifically , an A/California/7 / 2009 -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- pdm09-like virus ; an A -LRB- H3N2 -RRB- virus , similar for antigenic purposes to cell-propagated prototype virus A/Victoria/361 / 2011 ; and a virus similar to B/Massachusetts/2 / 2012 .
A second type of vaccine provides immunization for two influenza A viruses and two influenza B viruses .
The band 's spokeswoman Liz Rosenberg did not specify what type of cancer Mc Vie is receiving treatment for , nor did she comment on the extent of the disease .
A statement on the band 's website apologized to fans for the cancellation of the tour and explained that Mc Vie has been scheduled to receive treatment for during the scheduled dates .
Fleetwood Mac had just finished touring Europe .
The band is scheduled to perform in Las Vegas on December 30 .
Hendrick Motorsports driver Jeff Gordon won the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series 2013 Goody 's Headache Relief 500 on Sunday at Martinsville Speedway in Martinsville , Virginia .
Gordon started the race in ninth , and eventually won his first race of 2013 and snapping a 32-race winless streak .
The race , contested over 500 laps , featured a season-high 17 caution flags for 111 laps and involving 21 drivers , and 15 different race leaders .
The race was primarily dominated by championship contenders Jimmie Johnson and Matt Kenseth , who led 123 and 202 laps , respectively .
However , Johnson fell behind after a caution on lap 218 , and dropped back further into the field after another caution on lap 229 .
Kenseth relinquished the lead on lap 237 to Clint Bowyer , and was out of the top ten afterwards .
Gordon took the lead from Bowyer on lap 282 , which he held for 57 laps .
Johnson and Kenseth eventually caught up to the top ten , while Gordon lost positions due to a pit stop , but he reached second place with 80 laps to go .
On lap 479 , Gordon passed Kenseth entering turns one and two , and led for the remainder of the race .
Kenseth finished second , followed by Clint Bowyer , 2012 champion Brad Keselowski , and Johnson closed out the top five .
Kevin Harvick , pole-sitter Denny Hamlin , Dale Earnhardt , Jr. , Greg Biffle and last week 's race winner Jamie McMurray rounded out the top ten .
In the points race , Gordon moved up to third , 27 points behind Johnson and Kenseth , who were both tied for the lead with 2,294 .
The remaining ten drivers in the Chase for the Sprint Cup were : Harvick -LRB- 2,266 -RRB- , Kyle Busch -LRB- 2,258 -RRB- , Bowyer -LRB- 2,239 -RRB- , Earnhardt -LRB- 2,238 -RRB- , Biffle -LRB- 2,236 -RRB- , Kurt Busch -LRB- 2,219 -RRB- , Carl Edwards -LRB- 2,218 -RRB- , Joey Logano -LRB- 2209 -RRB- , Ryan Newman -LRB- 2,188 -RRB- and Kasey Kahne -LRB- 2,170 -RRB- .
The win was Gordon 's eighth at Martinsville , tying him with Johnson for the most among active drivers at the track .
The win also clinched the Manufacturers ' Championship for Chevrolet , the eleventh consecutive title for the American-based manufacturer .
The Iran-Pakistan gas pipeline project is at risk of cancellation as negotiations between the government of Iran and the Pakistani government remain unresolved .
The Iranian Oil Minister , Bijan Namdar Zangenah , doubts its future .
Reasons include the lack of support from the United States government .
The cost of sanctions on Iran and minimal funds are also causing concern .
The Pakistani government is trying to resolve the issue with Iran and the United States to reach a peaceful solution .
Graduated in literature by the Lehman College of CUNY in 1976 , Rufino Lopez has preserved his admiration to the great figures of Spanish literary and philosophical tradition , as Unamuno and Ortega y Gasset , or Cervantes , while shaping the Solera Restaurant , located in the city of New York for more than twenty years , near the United Nations Headquarters .
Rufino is the only son of Galician Francisco Lopez , who emigrated to New York City as a construction worker in 1971 .
While studying , Rufino Lopez worked in Italian and French restaurants , finding no Spanish restaurants that could represent the high value of Spanish cuisine in the Big Apple .
Since its opening , in the days when the paella was made in Manhattan in a pot with a lid instead of the regional authentic way as made in Valencia , with a pan , the Executive Chef of Solera Restaurant at that time , Dominick Cerrone , began incorporating Spanish regional dishes prepared with fidelity to its Spanish origin , one of the marks of the restaurant .
The history of the Spanish-American International Award began in 2012 , when the writer and filmmaker Artur Balder was awarded .
Artur Balder , now a US citizen , directed the documentary Little Spain , which displayed the historical memory of the Spanish district of Manhattan .
According to the website of the organization , the award was created with the mission to promote the image of Spanish emigration in the United States , and is given to promote the work of those who are contributing to the consolidation of the Spanish-American identity in the United States .
The Spanish-American International Prize was created to support emigrants who have made an outstanding contribution to the Spanish-American identity and the American heritage .
The Illinois House of Representatives voted 61 -- 54 yesterday to approve a law allowing for same-sex marriage .
Governor Pat Quinn is expected to sign the bill and ceremonies for same-sex couples are expected to start in June of next year .
The Catholic Conference of Illinois released a statement `` deeply disappointed that members of the General Assembly chose to redefine what is outside of its authority : a natural institution like marriage .
Pakistan 's Taliban announced Thursday they had chosen Mullah Fazlullah as their new leader .
A US drone attack last week killed their previous leader , Hakimullah Mehsud .
The Pakistani government has suggested the United States ' fatal missile strike on Mehsud had already ruined peace talk efforts with the Taliban .
The drone strike which killed Mehsud coincided with government preparations to meet the terrorist group with the view of opening peace talks .
Pakistani Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan called the killing of Mehsud `` not just the killing of person , it 's the death of all peace efforts '' .
Senior Editor for Australia 's Cleo magazine Sharri Markson confirmed on Wednesday that she will not be competing for the role of editor between the sudden merger of Dolly and Cleo titles .
The news came only days after German-based Bauer Media announced the merger of two of their most popular Australian magazines , with an expected loss of half the production staff by early next year .
The production team was informed of the merge in a staff meeting on Monday .
Chief executive Matt Stanton and publisher Sebastian Kadas explained the merger process , which will see the separate mastheads continue under the one production team and half the size of the normal magazine printing dimensions .
Both current editors Sharri Markson and Tiffany Dunk , along with the entire production team , were required to re-apply for their positions and compete against one another to secure a position .
However , according to The Australian , after only three days of consideration , Markson informed staff that she is not prepared to accept the role given it would mean producing two magazines with half the staff .
Former editors of both Dolly and Cleo are turning to Twitter to show support for the staff in danger of unemployment .
Mia Freedman posted ; `` Sad for all the girls who dream of working in magazines .
Thinking of Dolly & Cleo staff '' , and Lisa Wilkinson posting `` Very sad to hear news that Dolly & Cleo magazines are merging , with expected losses of half the staff .
And a personal one ... '' Wilkinson told The Sydney Morning Heald .
`` I just hope the magazine publishers in this country have been mentoring that new talent otherwise it simply will not work '' .
Bauer Media have released a statement addressing the situation , claiming to be `` continually reviewing every aspect of its business , looking at new opportunities for growth and investment , whilst ensuring all divisions are working as efficiently and effectively as possible '' .
Bauer 's CEO who addressed the staff on Monday continued , saying `` it makes sense to bring the staff creating these young women 's lifestyle titles together .
The single publishing unit enables us to tap the synergies and expertise between the mastheads to further enhance the reach and relevance of these two much-loved Australian magazine brands . ''
The production staff along with popular media personalities are publicly questioning the efficiency of the merge , as both titles have distinctly different audiences ; with Dolly aiming at teenager readers and Cleo at women in their 20s and 30s .
This combined with the ever increasing stress of publishing will only maximise the pressure on the new production team .
Ita Buttrose highlighted the concern , telling Crikey , `` I know everybody is cost-cutting at the moment , but this seems a bit extreme .
I ran the women 's division at ACP Magazines , but all the titles had their own clearly defined editors .
For one person to edit two magazines -- that may be something they do in Germany , but it 's new for me ... I 'd like to see their business plan . ''
With the 2014 Winter Paralympics set for March , Wikinews sought comment from U.S. Representative Jackie Speier , who serves California 's 14th congressional district about the event and how current U.S. policies impact people with disabilities .
For the first time ever , the Paralympics will be broadcast live in the U.S. on network television .
Jackie Speier : By-and-large the Affordable Care Act will have a significant and lasting beneficial impact on persons with disabilities -LSB- ... -RSB- Most importantly , pre-existing conditions will no longer prevent persons with disabilities from obtaining health insurance .
All of these provisions of the law create health insurance that is highly supportive of good health outcomes for everyone , but in particular for those who have a disability .
Jackie Speier : There are currently two Paralympic athletes who train or live in my district that people will definitely hear more about in the coming years .
One is a young woman named Allie Hyatt who trains in Judo with Willy Cahill , -LSB- whom -RSB- I have also trained with .
Allie , who is visually impaired and just 15 , has already won numerous awards and will participate in the Youth Olympic Games next year .
Hyatt lives in San Francisco and Cahill is the founder and CEO of the Blind Judo Foundation .
Lahna has proximal femoral focal deficiency -LRB- PFFD -RRB- , a birth defect that affects the hip and pelvis .
Saturday in a game played at Colegio San Agustin in Madrid in Spain 's top level wheelchair basketball league , CD Fundosa ONCE decisively beat Getafe BSR 86 -- 36 .
ONCE , with 2012 Summer Paralympics Australian international Bill Latham and British international Terry Bywater , came into the game with a multi-game winning streak in which they averaged 79 points while holding their opponents to an average of 31.5 points .
Getafe sent ONCE to the free throw line at 2:31 but ONCE was unable to make either basket .
With 2:29 left in the second , Zarzuela needed a wheel change .
At 2:17 , Connecticut native Ryan T. Martin shot an air ball .
At 2:09 , Bill Latham was at the line for ONCE , making his first free throw but missing his second .
With 1:44 left , Getafe scored for the first time since the eighth minute of the second quarter .
Getafe fouled Latham , who went to line and successfully converted the three-point play .
With 1:11 left in the second and the score at 41 -- 19 , the Getafe coach threw his clipboard on the ground .
With less than a minute left in the half , Getafe spent a lot of time playing with the ball and almost had a shot clock violation , before turning the ball over .
ONCE capitalized on it to score , ending the half with a score of 43 -- 19 .
The third quarter started with Getafe possession , but the team quickly turned the ball over , followed by Canary Islands native Daniel Serapio committing a foul against ONCE .
At 9:21 left in the third , the first points of the quarter were scored , bringing the game to 45 -- 19 in a three point play that Latham successfully finished to bring the score to 46 -- 19 .
At 8:49 , Medina took a shot for Getafe and missed .
ONCE got the rebound , only for Getafe to foul them .
At 8:33 , Getafe made a substitution , taking Serapio out and putting Madrid native Angel Silvela in .
At 8:00 left , Getafe got their first points of the quarter when Medina made two points to bring the score to 46 -- 21 .
At the 7:29 mark in the third , Getafe got a rebound off an ONCE shot turned the ball over to ONCE who then scored two points bringing the score to 48 -- 21 .
At 7:11 left , Czech player Petr Tucek subbed out after his behind small wheel came off .
ONCE subbed three people in at the 6:17 mark , bringing in Madrid native Carlos Vera , Barcelona native Jaume Llambi , and Pablo Zarzuela .
Alejandro Zarzuela scored one of his two free throw attempts at 6:09 to bring the score to 49 -- 23 .
ONCE scored another basket at the 5:39 mark .
Getafe 's Medina made a pass to no one at 5:18 , but his team managed to get the ball back -- but were unable to get their own rebound .
Getafe made a substitution at the 5:01 mark , with Lara coming in for Madrid native Jose Angel Mingo .
Pablo Zarzuela went to the free throw line for ONCE , missing both shots for score of 52 -- 23 .
He recovered his rebound , missed with Latham getting the rebound and making the shot at the 4:34 mark in the third .
Bandura got a shot up for Getafe at the 4:29 mark but missed .
ONCE scored 2 points at 4:05 to bring the score to 56 -- 23 .
The third quarter ended 62 -- 27 .
Bandura scored Getafe 's next points at the 3:29 mark for the game to be 58 -- 25 .
At the 2:28 mark , Rodríguez gets an ONCE rebound , Latham gets the ball , shoots and misses .
ONCE got their own rebound and scored 2 points to bring the game to 60 -- 27 at the 2:15 mark .
They quickly got another 2 points , and a timeout was called at 1:57 left in the third .
Tucek had successfully re-attached his wheel but was not subbed in .
Getafe 's Iranian international Morteza Gharibloo made a three point shot attempt that was an airball at the 1:36 mark , with ONCE picking the up the rebound .
ONCE turned the ball over , with Getafe regaining possession only to lose it because of a shot clock violation .
45 seconds into the fourth quarter , ONCE subbed Vera out , bringing Alejandro Zarzuela in .
Tucek scored for ONCE at the 9:05 mark .
With 8:45 left in the game , Martin took a shot and missed .
At the 8:36 mark , a technical was called against Getafe with Bywater taking both shots .
Latham scored for ONCE at 8:23 .
Swiss international Philipp Häfeli was double teamed , and fouled at 8:07 .
By the time 6:59 was left in the game , the score was 72.33 .
Latham scored for ONCE at the 6:15 mark following a missed shot by Rodríguez .
Llambi went to the line for a pair of shots at the 6:02 mark , missing both free throws .
At the 5:43 mark , Latham was fouled .
Rodríguez brought the ball in for his team .
Bywater put up a three point shot , but missed .
Gharibloo got the rebound for Getafe , took a shot and also missed .
At the 3:24 mark , Spanish international Almudena Montiel entered the game for the first time following a timeout .
ONCE then scored with 3:14 left in the game , bringing the score to 80 -- 34 .
The game would go on to end 86 -- 36 following a basket made by Llambi with 0:15 left in the game .
Coming to the game with several loud chanting fans and a drum , Getafe scored the first point of the game about 15 seconds into it off a free throw made by Polish player Krzysztof Bandura .
ONCE got the ball , and quickly scored 2 points .
With 8:34 left in the first quarter , Getafe led 3 -- 2 .
Gexto native Carlos Medina kept his team in it , scoring two points with 5:10 left in the first .
Terry Bywater tried a behind the back pass at 4:45 left in the first that resulted in turning the ball over to Getafe .
With 4:08 left in the first , Bywater made a 3 pointer that tied the score up at 13 -- 13 .
Shortly after that , ONCE had a player get a personal foul , turning the ball over to Getafe who were unable to hold onto it .
With 2:20 left in the first , ONCE led 15 -- 13 and a timeout was called .
Players took the opportunity to re-hydrate .
They built on that for a score of 19 -- 13 with 1:00 minute left in the first .
Bywater committed a personal foul in the remaining minute , falling over in his wheelchair while committing it .
With a few seconds left in the first , ONCE scored and Getafe was unable to get a shot up in the remaining seconds .
The first quarter ended 21 -- 13 .
Getafe scored first in the second quarter .
ONCE was unable to answer back on their run down the court , with Getafe getting the ball back and also being unable to score .
The start of the second saw ONCE more aggressive than Getafe , earning a few personal fouls .
The Getafe coach verbally expressed his frustration his team 's lack of rebounding at 7:42 in the second .
By the time there was 7:09 left in the second , ONCE led 26 -- 17 .
With 5:17 left in the second , ONCE forced a turn over , and made a substitution with Spanish international Paul Zarzuela coming out .
Getafe committed personal fouls at 4:00 and 3:46 left in the second .
With 3:39 left on the clock , the score was 30 -- 17 .
Jerez de la Frontera native Alejandro Zarzuela made a pair of free throws shortly after that to bring the score to 32 -- 17 .
Getafe took a timeout , and made a substitution , bringing in Virginia Perez , the team 's only female player .
With 3:11 left in the second quarter , Spanish international Rafael Muiño scored an easy layup for ONCE to bring the score to 34 -- 17 .
With 2:47 left , Getafe made another substitution , taking Swiss international Maurice Amacher out .
Recognition brings several government related benefits to Hijras including priority in education , housing and health .
Their gender designation will also appear on their passports as Hijras .
English language documents will refer to them as Hijras as the government claims any English translation would be misleading .
The decision was announced by Cabinet Secretary Musharraf Hossain Bhuiyan at a media briefing following the meeting .
A survey by the Ministry of Social Welfare says 10,000 people who identify as Hijras live in the country .
Iran agreed on Monday to allow the United Nations -LRB- UN -RRB- increased access to nuclear facilities according to a government announcement on state television .
UN monitors will gain access to a heavy water reactor still being built , as well as the largest uranium reactor in Iran .
According to the UN nuclear chief , Yukiya Amano , the agreement will be put in place within the next three months .
He said that Iran had agreed to `` implement practical measures '' to aid the UN inspectors .
This is the first deal that Iran has made with the International Atomic Energy Agency -LRB- IAEA -RRB- since 2007 .
The announcement came after talks between Iran and world leaders from the United States , France , China , Russia and Germany in Geneva , over the amount of access that the IAEA should have to Iranian nuclear sites .
The negotiations stalled , but are set to resume next week .
The IAEA has been pushing to inspect Iran 's nuclear facilities for a decade , currently having access to only 17 .
The Iranian government continues to assert that their nuclear program is peaceful , and wants the UN to lift sanctions .
French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius acknowledged that the agreement reached on Monday is a good sign for diplomacy , but also said that more work needed to be done .
Public officials and other experts gave presentations earlier this week regarding lessons learned during the aftermath of an explosion which struck the small town of West , Texas in April of this year .
The event , which was live-streamed to various locations across Texas , was sponsored by the Texas Department of State Health Services as a part of its Grand Rounds seminar offerings .
Three officials , each of whom were heavily involved in responding to the event , gave individual presentations .
Early on , Patterson commented about injuries sustained by citizens of West who lived in the neighborhood surrounding the chemical plant where the explosion occurred .
He also said 113 different agencies responded to the event .
Specifically , Patterson said , `` This was the first time I did n't have to request federal -LSB- agency -RSB- support .
He also presented a broad array of photos taken from the blast site and the surrounding neighborhood , pointing out that debris was found as far as 2.5 miles away from the chemical plant .
Regarding lessons learned during the days following the explosion , Patterson said all such incident teams need a social media person on-site .
He also said , `` Stress will take its toll on all involved . ''
Dana Lafayette represented the local mental healthcare provider for the county .
She explained mental health professionals offered assistance following the blast , but avoided being too intrusive with citizens .
She also stated , `` It was interesting to see the amount of resiliency within the community . ''
She indicated her agency 's primary focus was to `` create some sort of ` safe haven ' for victims of the blast . ''
Craine 's agency used a local church as a gathering place for citizen displaced from their homes as a result of the incident .
Notably , speaking about her agency 's after action report , Craine said , `` This -LSB- event 's -RSB- after action report is so big , we 're still working on ours . ''
On Thursday , the Allahabad High Court in India published a key judgment relating to the the Public Interest Litigation -LRB- PIL -RRB- suit filed by the Kautilya Society , an Indian public interest organization , that accuses the State of Uttar Pradesh of negligence in protecting the heritage of the historic city of Varanasi .
The dispute is increasingly polarising public opinion .
Vrinda Dar , in her role of Society Secretary , claimed that the FIRs had no connection with facts but are falsities for misinforming the public of Varanasi .
She asked the Court to order an independent investigation on the allegations , so that she may receive protection from what she calls an `` institutional harassment '' .
Licen has recently joined the Sport Management Program at Washington State University to develop its sport media and communication research and teaching contents .
A focus on the medal count as a means to establish supremacy is typical for American professional sports , and the Paralympics will never be able to beat the Olympic Games or the major leagues at their game .
This is why the Paralympic Games should involve a different narrative .
Countries typically allocate governmental support to the more vulnerable groups in society because those who are strong can protect their interests through their vast financial and social means .
In this sense , the United States should support participation in the Paralympic Games to promote adaptive sports in general and thus increase sports participation among people with disabilities .
People with disabilities are among those who most benefit from participating in sports and physical activity due to their health and social advantage ; however , they also have much fewer opportunities for sport participation and often require expensive adapted sports equipment .
Public funds should contribute to their sport activity in general , and federal funding of Paralympic athletes could certainly provide an excellent example for local communities .
Simon Ličen : Sports in the United States largely reaffirm existing relations of power in society .
It emphasizes consumerism , the belief that success always goes to people who merit it due to their abilities , dedication and qualifications , and reinforces , rather than changes , existing ideas related to gender , ethnicity and nationality .
Paralympic sport brings attention to athletes who are typically overlooked in American society because the majority of the population does not want to identify with people who are disabled .
Although disability is not contagious , interest in disabled sports might put into question the masculinity of the males following it .
Disabled athletes also challenge existing relations of power by displaying dedication , hard work and perseverance in different contexts than those most sports fans are accustomed to .
Even though legislative support may be less strong than the one provided by the Americans with Disabilities Act , many social institutions including the media are more receptive to this form of diversity .
Simon Ličen : The impact depends on a number of aspects .
One of them is the channels that NBC as the broadcasting rights owner for the United States will use to air the Paralympic Games on .
All in all , I think this is a terrific opportunity to improve sports coverage in a multitude of aspects ; but we will have to wait until after the event to assess to what extent the broadcasters will meet these expectations .
So daytime events will be shown live in the United States in the middle of the night , and evening prime-time events will be shown -- indeed live -- in the morning U.S. time .
So showing the Paralympics live on United States television might turn out to be less glamorous than it appears .
A third important factor is the way the event will be mediated : will NBC have its best sports broadcasters following the event after having worked the Winter Olympics ?
Why does the US media provide so little coverage of the Paralympics compared to other sports ?
Simon Ličen : I do n't think the media should be promoting any sports event .
I think the role of the media is to inform about the event and to cover it fairly .
It is not just the Paralympic Games , or disable sports in general that yield very little media coverage ; a recent study has shown that women 's sports only account for 1.3 % -- 1.6 % of televised news media .
The situation improves considerably during the Olympic Games and prime-time Olympic coverage comes close to equal coverage of both men 's and women 's sport .
Outside of that , however , U.S. media coverage is largely limited to the men 's four major leagues , college football and college basketball .
Again , the media decide which sports to cover based on their perceived entertainment value and its potential of generating sponsor revenues .
Simon Ličen : I would speculate that the American public is largely indifferent to the event as it is currently represented in the media .
In more general terms , however , the American public chooses to largely overlook disabled sports as the average able-bodied person likely does not want to be represented by , and thus identify with , a disabled person .
Simon Ličen : In general terms , this is both an opportunity and a risk : it can activate its sizable financial , promotional and media influence to bring attention to the Paralympic movement , but at the same time might choose to push disabled sports to the side in order to accommodate influential sponsors .
I am not familiar with the specific work done by the US Olympic Committee in terms of supporting , popularizing and expanding the Paralympic movement so I can not speculate which way the actual work done by the USOC sways .
Simon Ličen : Sport sponsorships are indeed strongly influenced by the media prominence of competing individuals .
Individual disabled athletes have already been able to secure profitable sponsorship and endorsement contracts ; perhaps the most notable example is Oscar Pistorius who was in this sense a true groundbreaker before falling off the pedestal due to his pending trial .
This is even more true when one considers that not all Olympic athletes are able to secure profitable or even exaggerated contacts : an Olympic archery champion is less appealing than an Olympic champion javelin thrower , a female javelin thrower is less appealing than a male sprinter , and a Jamaican champion sprinter is less appealing than an American elite basketball player .
Sporadic media appearances , such as those during the Paralympic fortnight , will hardly suffice to land disabled athletes major contracts ; an athlete has to be in the constant media and popular spotlights to secure lucrative contracts .
Until Paralympic athletes -LSB- ... -RSB- -LSB- are -RSB- able to achieve that kind of media presence , high sponsorships are likely to elude them .
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- : Many countries provide federal money to support their Olympic and Paralympic athletes .
Should the US consider this as a way of increasing visibility for the Paralympics , supporting increased opportunities for people with disabilities and increasing the US Paralympic medal count ?
George Zimmerman , the Florida man previously acquitted in the high-profile murder trial for the shooting of teenager Trayvon Martin , was arrested yesterday following an alleged domestic dispute .
Police were called to Zimmerman 's house after his girlfriend claimed Zimmerman pointed a shotgun at her .
George Zimmerman 's girlfriend Samantha Scheibe told the 911 -LSB- emergency telephone number -RSB- dispatcher : `` He 's in my house , breaking all my shit because I asked him to leave .
He 's got a freaking gun breaking all my stuff right now . ''
Zimmerman also phoned 911 during the incident and told the dispatcher : `` My girlfriend has ... for lack of a better word , gone crazy on me '' .
She broke a glass table '' , claimed Zimmerman .
Earlier this year , Zimmerman was found not guilty in the high-profile murder case of Trayvon Martin .
Zimmerman shot Martin on February 26 , 2012 while Martin was walking through a gated community after visiting a convenience store but Zimmerman 's lawyers successfully argued Zimmerman had acted in self defence .
The case raised concerns over `` stand your ground '' laws , United States gun culture , and the role of race and racial profiling as a factor in the events .
Members of the Scottish Parliament voted 98 -- 15 in a free vote yesterday to approve the Marriage and Civil Partnerships -LRB- Scotland -RRB- Bill , which seeks to legalise marriage between partners of the same sex .
If the legislation is passed , Scotland may start allowing same-sex couples to marry in 2015 .
Scottish government ministers have attempted to reassure religious groups who oppose same-sex marriage they will not be required by law to conduct them , but may `` opt in '' to conduct ceremonies for same-sex partners .
The law also contains provisions that would protect individuals from being required to perform marriages if their congregation has opted-in but they disagree with same-sex marriage .
Support for the bill crossed party lines .
Jim Hume from the Liberal Democrats said the vote was `` a demonstration that our Scottish society values everyone -- no matter their sexuality '' .
Conservative MSP -LRB- Member of Scottish Parliament -RRB- Ruth Davidson -- who is herself a lesbian -- argued in Parliament that the bill `` matters to the future nature of our country .
We have an opportunity today to tell our nation 's children that , no matter where they live and no matter who they love , there is nothing that they can not do .
We will wipe away the last legal barrier that says that they are something less than their peers .
We can help them to walk taller into the playground tomorrow and to face their accuser down knowing that the Parliament of their country has stood up for them and said that they are every bit as good as every one of their classmates . ''
From the Labour party , Mary Fee argued against the claim that existing civil partnership legislation was satisfactory : `` I ask the opponents of the bill who comment that civil partnerships were introduced for LGBT people whether the suffragettes were happy when the Representation of the People Act 1918 was introduced , allowing women over 30 to vote .
Elaine Smith , also a Labour MSP , said she feared MSPs opposing same-sex marriage were being `` bounced '' into supporting the bill for fear of being branded homophobic .
`` Since indicating that I did not intend to support the redefinition of marriage , my religion 's been disparaged , I 've been branded homophobic and bigoted , I 've been likened to the Ku Klux Klan and it was suggested that I be burnt at the stake as a witch '' , Smith claimed .
Outside the Scottish Parliament on Wednesday , a demonstration was held by the LGBT rights group Equality Network supporting the bill .
Tom French from the Equality Network said of the vote : `` Tonight the Scottish Parliament voted by an overwhelming majority to back same-sex marriage and uphold the principle that we should all be equal under the law . ''
Colin Macfarlane from the gay rights group Stonewall Scotland also welcomed the vote : `` This is a truly historic step forward .
We 're absolutely delighted that MSPs have demonstrated overwhelmingly that they 're in touch with the twenty-first century . ''
The Roman Catholic Church and the Church of Scotland both oppose the Bill .
Reverend Dr William Hamilton from the Church of Scotland said while the Church opposes same-sex marriage , they stand against homophobia and `` will continue to be a constructive voice in the national debate '' about the bill .
Police said : `` Police were contacted in October by Freedom Charity after they had received a call from a woman stating she had been held against her will in a house in London for more than 30 years .
Further inquiries by police revealed the location of the house and with the help of sensitive negotiations conducted by the charity the three women , a 69-year-old Malaysian woman , a 57-year-old Irish woman and a 30-year-old British woman , were all rescued . ''
The three women were allegedly held in captivity by two 67-year-olds , a man and a woman , who were both arrested and released on bail until January .
Freedom Charity , the non-profit which reported the case to the police , was contacted by the Irish woman who had seen a documentary on ITV about forced marriages .
A week after the call was made , and after further investigations by the police , the women were freed .
Thai-Japanese Bangkok Youth Center , Bangkok -- The Australia men 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Rollers , and the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders , won gold medals on Friday , the final day of the Asia -- Oceania Zone Wheelchair Basketball Championships in Bangkok , Thailand .
The eight day championship was opened on November 22 .
Ten countries competed for places at the International Wheelchair Basketball Federation -LRB- IWBF -RRB- World Championships next year -- ten in the men 's : Japan , Iran , China , Malaysia , Taipei , Australia , Korea , Kuwait , New Zealand and Thailand ; and four in the women 's : Australia , Japan , China and Thailand .
For the Australians , it was a rare opportunity to play teams from neighboring countries .
Their efforts to help other teams were appreciated ; after one game the Kuwait men led a cheer of `` Aussie !
Both the Australian teams went through the tournament undefeated .
The Gliders defeated China in the gold medal game 57 -- 35 .
The Rollers then took to the court and defeated Korea 63 -- 46 .
Iran and Japan won the men 's and women 's bronze medal matches .
The zones correspond to those of the IPC and FIBA : Americas , Europe , Asia -- Oceania and Africa .
Each zone is guaranteed one place at the World Championships .
Only the home team is guaranteed a place .
The new zone system has already proved controversial , with Algeria defeating South Africa in the recent Africa Zone Championships in Angola to grab the sole spot allocated to Africa , and Canada missing out on one of the four men 's spots for the Americas zone .
In a shock result , these places went to the United States , Argentina , Mexico and Colombia .
Great Britain , Turkey , Spain , Sweden , Italy , Germany and the Netherlands are to round out the championships as the men 's teams from the European Zone .
The men 's World Championship are to be held in July next year in Incheon , South Korea , while the women 's are to be in Toronto , Canada .
President and Secretary General of the IWBF told Wikinews the women 's competition will in no way be inferior to the men 's .
The women are to be put up in a five-star hotel , and play at Toronto 's Maple Leaf Gardens .
Without their men 's team competing , the women 's competition is expected to generate considerable interest in Canada .
The home team is to be joined by teams from the Netherlands , Germany , Great Britain , France , the United States , Brazil , Mexico , and Peru to compete against the winners from the Asia -- Oceania Zone .
Yesterday in Geneva , Iran and the P5 +1 nations -- the five permanent members of the UN Security Council ; United States , United Kingdom , China , France , and Russia ; plus Germany -- reached a six-month deal over Iran 's nuclear enrichment programme .
Iran is to reduce its nuclear activities in return for a lifting of some economic sanctions .
Iran has agreed to not build any new enrichment facilities , to halt enrichment of uranium past a purity of 5 % , to `` neutralise '' a stockpile of nearly 200kg of enriched uranium of a purity of nearly 20 % , to not install new centrifuges , and to disable a number of existing centrifuges .
In return , the P5 +1 is to provide `` limited , temporary , targeted , and reversible '' relief from economic sanctions including removal of specific trade sanctions on precious metals , including gold ; the automotive sector ; and oil .
In Tehran , Iran 's negotiators were welcomed home at the airport by a gathering of supporters holding placards .
Hundreds of thousands of Iranians reportedly watched coverage of the negotiations through the Iranian night .
US president Barack Obama welcomed the deal : `` For the first time in nearly a decade , we have halted the progress of the Iranian nuclear program , and key parts of the program will be rolled back . ''
He said the provisions of the deal `` cut off Iran 's most likely paths to a bomb '' .
John Kerry , the United States Secretary of State , appeared with British foreign minister William Hague at a press conference in London .
Kerry told reporters : `` Now the really hard part begins , and that is the effort to get the comprehensive agreement , which will require enormous steps in terms of verification , transparency and accountability '' .
Benjamin Netanyahu , prime minister of Israel , said the deal was a `` historic mistake '' and said the Iranians had agreed only to `` cosmetic concessions '' that `` can be undone by the Iranians within weeks '' .
`` Israel '' , he said , `` is not bound to this agreement while Iran is committed to the destruction of Israel .
I wish to reiterate that as the prime minister of Israel -- Israel will not allow Iran to develop nuclear military capabilities . ''
He also said : `` Iran is receiving billions of dollars in relief in the sanctions without paying any sort of price .
Iran is receiving written approval to violate UN Security Council resolutions '' .
Obama phoned Netanyahu on Sunday to try and reassure him .
Thai-Japanese Bangkok Youth Center , Bangkok -- Wikinews interviewed Georgia Inglis , of the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders .
The Gliders are in Bangkok , Thailand , for the Asia-Oceania Zone Wheelchair Basketball Championships , which are being held at the Thai-Japanese Bangkok Youth Center .
We all went over there .
They are hoping to qualify for the World Championships , which are being held in Toronto , Canada , in June next year .
With the US retail tradition of ` Black Friday ' already underway early Thursday evening , some shoppers began gathering outside retail stores as much as 53 hours prior to these special sales events .
This , according to a Texas man who told Wikinews that he and his companions had started gathering at their local Best Buy store at 1:00 pm on Tuesday , awaiting the 6:00 pm Thursday opening .
Target retail stores opened across the country at 8pm -LRB- local time -RRB- on Thursday evening .
At 8:45 pm Thursday evening , approximately 500 cars were parked at the Target store in Tyler , Texas .
At least four camping tents were set up outside the Best Buy store in the Dallas , Texas area , during pre-dawn hours on Thanksgiving morning .
Years ago , it was seen as something special for retail stores to open at 6am on the so-called ` Black Friday ' following Thanksgiving Day ; that time would be considered `` late '' by modern standards .
Many retailers use barricades to organize those who gather at their storefronts .
For the first time ever , a shopping mall in Las Cruces , New Mexico will open at 8pm on Thanksgiving Day and will remain open for 25 consecutive hours , closing at 9pm Friday evening .
In recent years , several significant injuries have occurred during the melee that often ensued when stores opened their doors for Black Friday events .
In 2011 , a woman shot pepper spray at 20 people who were waiting to purchase the newest Xbox system .
Thai-Japanese Bangkok Youth Center , Bangkok -- Wikinews interviewed Caitlin de Wit , of the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , known as the Gliders .
The Gliders are in Bangkok , Thailand , for the Asia -- Oceania Zone Wheelchair Basketball Championships , which are being held at the Thai-Japanese Bangkok Youth Center .
My family traveled a little bit as a kid , so ... yeah .
Caitlin de Wit : I ran a little bit , and I rode horses .
Yesterday in London , former UK Prime Minister Sir John Major gave a speech at the Institute of Directors outlining his opposition to plans for Scottish independence .
This follows the publication earlier in the week of a white paper by the Scottish government outlining plans for what would happen if the country votes to leave the United Kingdom .
Major said that there wo n't be a currency union between a newly independent Scotland and a post-split United Kingdom : `` A currency union , which the SNP -LSB- Scottish National Party -RSB- assume is negotiable , would require the UK to underwrite Scottish debts .
That can not , will not , happen if Scotland leaves the Union .
There can be no halfway house , no quasi-independence underpinned by UK institutions . ''
Major said the other alternative was to join the Euro , but this would require Scotland to first join the European Union .
Spain uses uncertainty over EU membership to deter Catalonia from even holding a referendum on independence .
Major also said that Scottish nationalists engaged in anti-English sentiment .
`` Anti-English sentiment from separatists irritates and enrages , as it is intended to do , but across the UK people know and value Scots as partners , work colleagues , friends and neighbours .
It is hard to imagine Scots becoming foreigners . ''
A spokesperson for Alex Salmond , First Minister of Scotland and the leader of the Scottish National Party , responded to Major 's remarks : `` Sir John Major is quite wrong to suggest that the rest of the UK should lay exclusive claim to all the assets of the UK , which the people of Scotland contribute to and of which Sterling is one .
He was the Tory prime minister who presided over his party 's complete wipe-out in Scotland and the more he tries to lecture the people of Scotland , the better it will be for the Yes vote . ''
Investigations into claims of sexual abuse by the former television presenter , and DJ , Jimmy Savile are expanding to cover an additional 19 hospitals in the United Kingdom , Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt announced Friday .
Hunt told Parliament , in a written statement , the investigation around Savile 's access through the health service are now to report by June next year .
About a year after Savile 's death in October 2011 , ITV broadcast a documentary where several women claim to have been sexually abused by the former TV star .
Since then , many more people have come forward with statements claiming abuse by Savile .
In addition , a number of other celebrities and public figures have been arrested in connection with claims of sexual abuse and rape .
Brian Tooke , a former nurse at the now closed De La Pole Hospital in Willerby , said : `` I was appalled when I heard it all -- they are vulnerable people and should be protected .
The wreckage of a crashed plane carrying by various reports 33 or 34 occupants has been found in Namibia but none of its passengers or crew survived , police in the country said yesterday .
LAM Mozambique Airlines Flight 470 took off from the Mozambique capital 's airport at 11:26 CAT -LRB- 0926 UTC -RRB- Friday and was scheduled to reach an airport in Luanda , the capital of Angola , at 14:10 WAT -LRB- 1310 UTC -RRB- .
The remains of the plane were discovered at Bwabwata National Park in Namibia , close to the borders between Angola and Botswana .
Kavango Region police coordinator Willie Bampton reportedly said yesterday : `` My team on the ground have found the wreckage .
A nearby game ranger with the surname Shinonge described bodies being `` scattered all over the place '' , adding , `` It 's a horrible sight '' .
Shinonge also said investigators managed to find and recover the aircraft 's black boxes .
In the immediate aftermath of the incident , when the aircraft 's exact location was unknown , LAM Mozambique Airlines stated : `` Information obtained indicates that the flight has landed in a location in Northern Namibia , bordering Angola and Botswana near a place called Rundu . ''
However , the airline later confirmed the plane had in fact crashed .
`` At this time , our thoughts and prayers are with the families and loved ones of the passengers and crew who were on board the aircraft .
LAM has established family assistance centres at Maputo and Luanda airports to support the families who are naturally distressed '' , a further statement from the company said .
Authorities from Namibia , Angola , Botswana , and South Africa were thanked by the airline for their assistance in the search for the plane .
In a statement , LAM Mozambique Airlines said : `` We do not have any information on the circumstances of the accident and we can not speculate on possible causes as the investigators must be given the time and space to do their work without interference or prejudice . ''
Mandela spent 27 years doing hard labour in prison , much of it on Robben Island , during the era of apartheid before becoming the first black president of South Africa in 1994 .
US President Barack Obama said of Mandela : `` To so many of us , he was more than just a man -- he was a symbol of the struggle for justice , equality , and dignity in South Africa and around the globe .
His sacrifice was so great that it called upon people everywhere to do what they could on behalf of human progress . ''
David Cameron , the British prime minister , paid tribute to Mandela : `` A great light has gone out in the world .
Former US President Bill Clinton said : `` Today the world has lost one of its most important leaders and one of its finest human beings .
History will remember Nelson Mandela as a champion for human dignity and freedom , for peace and reconciliation . ''
Former British prime minister Tony Blair also paid tribute to Mandela : `` Through his leadership , he guided the world into a new era of politics in which black and white , developing and developed , north and south , despite all the huge differences in wealth and opportunity , stood for the first time together on equal terms .
Through his dignity , grace and the quality of his forgiveness , he made racism everywhere not just immoral but stupid ; something not only to be disagreed with , but to be despised .
Yesterday , Wikinews interviewed Steve Redhead , a Professor of Sports Media and Acting Head of School of Human Movement Studies at Charles Sturt University in New South Wales , Australia , about the Australian women 's national soccer team -LRB- Matildas -RRB- , the Australian men 's national soccer team -LRB- Socceroos -RRB- and the current differences between the state of women and men 's soccer in Australia .
The Socceroos are currently getting international attention following yesterday 's 2014 FIFA World Cup draw which placed the 59th FIFA ranked team in the same group as top FIFA ranked Spain , fifteenth ranked Chile and the ninth ranked Netherlands .
Does the cultural heritage of male-driven narratives make one national team more inherently authentic than the other ?
The Matildas were in the news late last month , following their AFC Women 's Asian Cup 2014 draw which saw them placed in the group with Japan , Vietnam and Jordan .
With the competition scheduled to take place in May , the Matildas are looking to repeat their performance as AFC champions .
Domestically , Australia 's top women 's club team Sydney FC finish third in the International Women 's Club Championship held in Japan this past week after defeating South American club champions Colo-Colo in a penalty shootout .
-LRB- -LRB- Wikinews -RRB- -RRB- : The Socceroos are ranked 59th by FIFA .
The Matildas are ranked 8th by FIFA in the latest rankings .
Should media coverage correlate to team performance and international rankings ?
Steve Redhead : If we take soccer teams , with the newish rules on tackling from behind globally soccer has become almost a non-contact sport -- this has helped the women 's game enormously and the styles of play do n't differ very much at all .
If you were from outer space watching games , you would not know that a game was being played by men or women at the top level .
Goalkeeping in the women 's game looks different because of this difference .
SR : Socceroos have been in decline since Hiddink stopped being coach .
Aging team , no great young players coming through to replace the golden generation .
Why do you think the W-League has been unable to capitalize on the female audience like netball has ?
-LRB- -LRB- WN -RRB- -RRB- : None of the Socceroos received DAS -LSB- Direct Athlete Support -RSB- grants from the Australian Sports Commission in the past year while almost every single player on the Matildas received DAS or SLGSfW -LSB- Sports Leadership Grants and Scholarships for Women -RSB- funding .
In addition , there exists a hierarchy of stress level in the three fault types .
Thrust faults are generated by the highest , strike slip by intermediate , and normal faults by the lowest stress levels .
This can easily be understood by considering the direction of the greatest principal stress , the direction of the force that ` pushes ' the rock mass during the faulting .
In the case of normal faults , the rock mass is pushed down in a vertical direction , thus the pushing force -LRB- greatest principal stress -RRB- equals the weight of the rock mass itself .
In the case of thrusting , the rock mass ` escapes ' in the direction of the least principal stress , namely upward , lifting the rock mass up , thus the overburden equals the least principal stress .
Strike-slip faulting is intermediate between the other two types described above .
This difference in stress regime in the three faulting environments can contribute to differences in stress drop during faulting , which contributes to differences in the radiated energy , regardless of fault dimensions .
The instrumental scales used to describe the size of an earthquake began with the Richter magnitude scale in the 1930s .
It is a relatively simple measurement of an event 's amplitude , and its use has become minimal in the 21st century .
Seismic waves travel through the Earth 's interior and can be recorded by seismometers at great distances .
The surface wave magnitude was developed in the 1950s as a means to measure remote earthquakes and to improve the accuracy for larger events .
The Japan Meteorological Agency seismic intensity scale , the Medvedev -- Sponheuer -- Karnik scale , and the Mercalli intensity scale are based on the observed effects .
A flood is an overflow of any amount of water that reaches land .
Floods occur usually when the volume of water within a body of water , such as a river or lake , exceeds the total capacity of the formation , and as a result some of the water flows or sits outside of the normal perimeter of the body .
Earthquakes may cause landslips to dam rivers , which collapse and cause floods .
The objective of earthquake engineering is to foresee the impact of earthquakes on buildings and other structures and to design such structures to minimize the risk of damage .
Existing structures can be modified by seismic retrofitting to improve their resistance to earthquakes .
Earthquake insurance can provide building owners with financial protection against losses resulting from earthquakes .
In 1569 there was a major Catholic rising in the North ; the goal was to free Mary , marry her to Thomas Howard , 4th Duke of Norfolk , and put her on the English throne .
After the rebels ' defeat , over 750 of them were executed on Elizabeth 's orders .
In the belief that the revolt had been successful , Pope Pius V issued a bull in 1570 , titled Regnans in Excelsis , which declared `` Elizabeth , the pretended Queen of England and the servant of crime '' to be excommunicate and a heretic , releasing all her subjects from any allegiance to her .
Catholics who obeyed her orders were threatened with excommunication .
The papal bull provoked legislative initiatives against Catholics by Parliament , which were , however , mitigated by Elizabeth 's intervention .
In 1581 , to convert English subjects to Catholicism with `` the intent '' to withdraw them from their allegiance to Elizabeth was made a treasonable offence , carrying the death penalty .
From the 1570s missionary priests from continental seminaries came to England secretly in the cause of the `` reconversion of England '' .
Many suffered execution , engendering a cult of martyrdom .
We could never have imagined -LRB- had we not seen it fall out in experience -RRB- that a man raised up by ourself and extraordinarily favoured by us , above any other subject of this land , would have in so contemptible a sort broken our commandment in a cause that so greatly touches us in honour ... And therefore our express pleasure and commandment is that , all delays and excuses laid apart , you do presently upon the duty of your allegiance obey and fulfill whatsoever the bearer hereof shall direct you to do in our name .
Elizabeth continued to maintain the diplomatic relations with the Tsardom of Russia originally established by her deceased brother .
She often wrote to Ivan IV -LRB- `` Ivan the Terrible '' -RRB- , on amicable terms , though the Tsar was often annoyed by her focus on commerce rather than on the possibility of a military alliance .
The Tsar even proposed to her once , and during his later reign , asked for a guarantee to be granted asylum in England should his rule be jeopardised .
Upon Ivan 's death , he was succeeded by his simple-minded son Feodor .
Unlike his father , Feodor had no enthusiasm in maintaining exclusive trading rights with England .
Feodor declared his kingdom open to all foreigners , and dismissed the English ambassador Sir Jerome Bowes , whose pomposity had been tolerated by the new Tsar 's late father .
Elizabeth sent a new ambassador , Dr. Giles Fletcher , to demand from the regent Boris Godunov that he convince the Tsar to reconsider .
The negotiations failed , due to Fletcher addressing Feodor with two of his titles omitted .
Elizabeth continued to appeal to Feodor in half appealing , half reproachful letters .
The picture of Elizabeth painted by her Protestant admirers of the early 17th century has proved lasting and influential .
Her memory was also revived during the Napoleonic Wars , when the nation again found itself on the brink of invasion .
In the Victorian era , the Elizabethan legend was adapted to the imperial ideology of the day , and in the mid-20th century , Elizabeth was a romantic symbol of the national resistance to foreign threat .
Historians of that period , such as J. E. Neale -LRB- 1934 -RRB- and A. L. Rowse -LRB- 1950 -RRB- , interpreted Elizabeth 's reign as a golden age of progress .
Neale and Rowse also idealised the Queen personally : she always did everything right ; her more unpleasant traits were ignored or explained as signs of stress .
This makes them more suitable for pharmaceutical use as the chronic harms are lower .
Primary alcohols -LRB- R-CH2-OH -RRB- can be oxidized either to aldehydes -LRB- R-CHO -RRB- or to carboxylic acids -LRB- R-CO2H -RRB- , while the oxidation of secondary alcohols -LRB- R1R2CH-OH -RRB- normally terminates at the ketone -LRB- R1R2C =O -RRB- stage .
The major touring car championships conducted worldwide are the Supercars Championship -LRB- Australia -RRB- , British Touring Car Championship , Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters -LRB- DTM -RRB- , and the World Touring Car Championship .
The first prearranged match race of two self-powered road vehicles over a prescribed route occurred at 4:30 A.M. on August 30 , 1867 , between Ashton-under-Lyne and Old Trafford , a distance of eight miles .
Saul Friedländer writes that : `` Not one social group , not one religious community , not one scholarly institution or professional association in Germany and throughout Europe declared its solidarity with the Jews . ''
He writes that some Christian churches declared that converted Jews should be regarded as part of the flock , but even then only up to a point .
Friedländer argues that this makes the Holocaust distinctive because antisemitic policies were able to unfold without the interference of countervailing forces of the kind normally found in advanced societies such as industry , small businesses , churches , trade unions , and other vested interests and lobby groups .
French Jews were also highly active in the French Resistance , which conducted a guerilla campaign against the Nazis and Vichy French authorities , assisted the Allies in their sweep across France , and supported Allied including Free French forces in the liberation of many occupied French cities .
Although Jews made up only one percent of the French population , they made up fifteen to twenty percent of the French Resistance .
The Jewish youth movement EEIF , which had originally shown support for the Vichy regime , was banned in 1943 , and many of its older members formed armed resistance units .
Zionist Jews also formed the Armee Juive -LRB- Jewish Army -RRB- , which participated in armed resistance under a Zionist flag , and smuggled Jews out of the country .
Both organizations merged in 1944 , and participated in the liberation of Paris , Lyon , Toulouse , Grenoble , and Nice .
The basic motivation -LSB- of the Holocaust -RSB- was purely ideological , rooted in an illusionary world of Nazi imagination , where an international Jewish conspiracy to control the world was opposed to a parallel Aryan quest .
In October 1943 , Himmler gave a speech to senior Nazi Party officials gathered in Poznań .
The use of extermination camps -LRB- also called `` death camps '' -RRB- equipped with gas chambers for the systematic mass extermination of peoples was an unprecedented feature of the Holocaust .
These were established at Auschwitz , Belzec , Chełmno , Jasenovac , Majdanek , Maly Trostenets , Sobibór , and Treblinka .
They were built for the systematic purpose of killing millions , primarily by gassing , but also by execution and extreme work under starvation conditions .
Stationary facilities built for the purpose of mass extermination resulted from earlier Nazi experimentation with poison gas during the secret Action T4 euthanasia programme against mental patients .
The roughly six million killed in the Holocaust represent 60 to 75 percent of the European Jewry , based on the estimated number of about eight to ten million Jews in the territories controlled by the Nazis .
The uncertainty arises from the lack of knowledge about how many Jews there were in the Soviet Union ; compounded by the NKVD practice of renaming foreign nationals as their own in areas occupied by the USSR .
By the end of 1941 , close to 230,000 Jews in Latvia and Lithuania had been murdered during the previous six months .
Of 4,000 Jews in Estonia before the German invasion , some 3,000 fled to the Soviet Union .
The remaining 1,000 were all murdered by the SS killing squads .
Generalplan Ost -LSB- ... -RSB- forecast the diminution of the targeted east European peoples ' populations by the following measures : Poles -- 85 percent ; Belarusians -- 75 percent ; Ukrainians -- 65 percent ; Czechs -- 50 percent .
-LSB- ... -RSB- The Russian people , once subjugated in war , would join the four Slavic-speaking nations whose fate Generalplan Ost foreshadowed .
According to the most recent study , Bošnjaci u Jasenovačkom logoru -LRB- `` Bosniaks in the Jasenovac concentration camp '' -RRB- by the author Nihad Halilbegović , at least 103,000 Bosniaks -LRB- Bosnian Muslims -RRB- perished during the Holocaust at the hands of the Nazi regime and the Croatian Ustaše .
According to the study , `` unknown is the full number of Bosniaks who were murdered under Serb or Croat alias or national name '' and `` a large numbers of Bosniaks were killed and listed under Roma populations '' , therefore in advance sentenced to death and extermination .
Excluding Slovenes under Italian rule , between 20,000 and 25,000 Slovenes were killed by Nazis or fascists -LRB- counting only civilian victims -RRB- .
In Belarus , Nazi Germany imposed a regime in the country that was responsible for burning down some 9,000 villages , deporting some 380,000 people for slave labour , and killing hundreds of thousands of civilians .
More than 600 villages , like Khatyn massacre , were burned along with their entire population and at least 5,295 Belarusian settlements were destroyed by the Nazis and some or all of their inhabitants killed .
Tim Snyder states : `` Of the nine million people who were on the territory of Soviet Belarus in 1941 , some 1.6 million were killed by the Germans in actions away from battlefields , including about 700,000 prisoners of war , 500,000 Jews , and 320,000 people counted as partisans -LRB- the vast majority of whom were unarmed civilians . ''
German communists , socialists and trade unionists were among the earliest domestic opponents of Nazism and were also among the first to be sent to concentration camps .
Hitler claimed that communism was a Jewish ideology which the Nazis termed `` Judeo-Bolshevism '' .
Fear of communist agitation was used as justification for the Enabling Act of 1933 , the law which gave Hitler his original dictatorial powers .
Hermann Göring later testified at the Nuremberg Trials that the Nazis ' willingness to repress German communists prompted president Paul von Hindenburg and the German elite to cooperate with the Nazis .
MI6 assisted the Gestapo via `` the exchange of information about Communism '' , and as late as October 1937 , the head of the British agency 's Berlin station , Frank Foley , described his relationship with Heinrich Müller 's so-called communism expert as `` cordial '' .
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum believes that , `` because many of the Freemasons who were arrested were also Jews and/or members of the political opposition , it is not known how many individuals were placed in Nazi concentration camps and/or were targeted only because they were Freemasons . ''
However , the Grand Lodge of Scotland estimates the number of Freemasons executed between 80,000 and 200,000 .
The International Military Tribunal was opened on 19 November 1945 , in the Palace of Justice in Nuremberg .
The first session was presided over by the Soviet judge , Nikitchenko .
The prosecution entered indictments against 24 major war criminals and seven organizations -- the leadership of the Nazi party , the Reich Cabinet , the Schutzstaffel -LRB- SS -RRB- , Sicherheitsdienst -LRB- SD -RRB- , the Gestapo , the Sturmabteilung -LRB- SA -RRB- and the `` General Staff and High Command '' , comprising several categories of senior military officers .
These organizations were to be declared `` criminal '' if found guilty .
The councils ' importance in facilitating Germany 's persecution and murder of ghetto inhabitants was not lost on the Nazis : one official was emphatic that `` the authority of the Jewish council be upheld and strengthened under all circumstances '' , another that `` Jews who disobey instructions of the Jewish council are to be treated as saboteurs . ''
When cooperation crumbled , as happened in the Warsaw ghetto after the Jewish Combat Organisation displaced the council 's authority , the Germans lost control .
A number of deadly pogroms occurred during the Second World War .
The Nazis encouraged some and others were spontaneous .
Notable are the Iaşi pogrom in Romania on 30 June 1941 , in which as many as 14,000 Jews were killed by Romanian residents and police .
In the infamous series of Lviv pogroms committed in occupied Poland by nationalists from the Ukrainian People 's Militia in Lwów -LRB- now , Ukraine -RRB- , some 6,000 Polish Jews were murdered in the streets between 30 June and 29 July 1941 , on top of 3,000 arrests and mass shootings by Einsatzgruppe C .
Other pogroms perpetrated by the Ukrainian militia in Polish provincial capitals included Łuck and Tarnopol .
During the Jedwabne pogrom of July 1941 , in the presence of the Nazi Ordnungspolizei 300 Jews were locked in a barn by local Poles and burned to death , which was preceded by German execution of 40 Jewish men at the same location .
Starting in December 1939 , the Nazis introduced new methods of mass murder by using gas .
First , experimental gas vans equipped with gas cylinders and a sealed trunk compartment , were used to kill mental-care clients of sanatoria in Pomerania , East Prussia , and occupied Poland , as part of an operation termed Action T4 .
In the Sachsenhausen concentration camp , larger vans holding up to 100 people were used from November 1941 , using the engine 's exhaust rather than a cylinder .
These vans were introduced to the Chełmno extermination camp in December 1941 , and another 15 of them were used by the Einsatzgruppen in the occupied Soviet Union .
These gas vans were developed and run under supervision of the SS-Reichssicherheitshauptamt -LRB- Reich Main Security Office -RRB- and were used to kill about 500,000 people , primarily Jews but also Romani and others .
The vans were carefully monitored and after a month of observation a report stated that `` ninety seven thousand have been processed using three vans , without any defects showing up in the machines '' .
The officials were told there were 2.3 million Jews in the General Government , 850,000 in Hungary , 1.1 million in the other occupied countries , and up to five million in the USSR , although two million of these were in areas still under Soviet control -- a total of about 6.5 million .
These would all be transported by train to extermination camps -LRB- Vernichtungslager -RRB- in Poland , where almost all of them would be gassed at once .
In some camps , such as Auschwitz , those fit for work would be kept alive for a while , but eventually all would be killed .
Göring 's representative , Erich Neumann , gained a limited exemption for some classes of industrial workers .
The most common cancers found during pregnancy are the same as the most common cancers found in non-pregnant women during childbearing ages : breast cancer , cervical cancer , leukemia , lymphoma , melanoma , ovarian cancer and colorectal cancer .
Veterinary oncology , concentrating mainly on cats and dogs , is a growing specialty in wealthy countries and the major forms of human treatment such as surgery and radiotherapy may be offered .
Animals , typically rodents , are often used in cancer research and studies of natural cancers in larger animals may benefit research into human cancer .
People with untreated celiac disease have a higher risk , but this risk decreases with time after diagnosis and strict treatment , probably due to the adoption of a gluten-free diet , which seems to have a protective role against development of malignancy in people with celiac disease .
However , the delay in diagnosis and initiation of a gluten-free diet seems to increase the risk of malignancies .
Rates of gastrointestinal cancers are increased in people with Crohn 's disease and ulcerative colitis , due to chronic inflammation .
Also , immunomodulators and biologic agents used to treat these diseases may promote developing extra-intestinal malignancies .
The classical view of cancer is a set of diseases that are driven by progressive genetic abnormalities that include mutations in tumor-suppressor genes and oncogenes and chromosomal abnormalities .
This is shown in the figure at the 4th level from the top .
-LRB- In the figure , red wording indicates the central role of DNA damage and defects in DNA repair in progression to cancer . -RRB-
When DNA repair is deficient DNA damage remains in cells at a higher than usual level -LRB- 5th level -RRB- and cause increased frequencies of mutation and/or epimutation -LRB- 6th level -RRB- .
Mutation rates increase substantially in cells defective in DNA mismatch repair or in homologous recombinational repair -LRB- HRR -RRB- .
Chromosomal rearrangements and aneuploidy also increase in HRR defective cells .
In sporadic cancers , deficiencies in DNA repair are occasionally caused by a mutation in a DNA repair gene but are much more frequently caused by epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence expression of DNA repair genes .
This is indicated in the figure at the 3rd level .
Many studies of heavy metal-induced carcinogenesis show that such heavy metals cause a reduction in expression of DNA repair enzymes , some through epigenetic mechanisms .
DNA repair inhibition is proposed to be a predominant mechanism in heavy metal-induced carcinogenicity .
In addition , frequent epigenetic alterations of the DNA sequences code for small RNAs called microRNAs -LRB- or miRNAs -RRB- .
miRNAs do not code for proteins , but can `` target '' protein-coding genes and reduce their expression .
The primary ones include surgery , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , hormonal therapy , targeted therapy and palliative care .
Which treatments are used depends on the type , location and grade of the cancer as well as the patient 's health and preferences .
Palliative care refers to treatment that attempts to help the patient feel better and may be combined with an attempt to treat the cancer .
Palliative care includes action to reduce physical , emotional , spiritual and psycho-social distress .
Unlike treatment that is aimed at directly killing cancer cells , the primary goal of palliative care is to improve quality of life .
Multiple national medical guidelines recommend early palliative care for patients whose cancer has produced distressing symptoms or who need help coping with their illness .
In patients first diagnosed with metastatic disease , palliative care may be immediately indicated .
Palliative care is indicated for patients with a prognosis of less than 12 months of life even given aggressive treatment .
Observations of El Niño events since 1950 , show that impacts associated with El Niño events depend on what season it is .
However , while certain events and impacts are expected to occur during events , it is not certain or guaranteed that they will occur .
The impacts that generally do occur during most El Niño events include below-average rainfall over Indonesia and northern South America , while above average rainfall occurs in southeastern South America , eastern equatorial Africa , and the southern United States .
Extreme weather conditions related to the El Niño cycle correlate with changes in the incidence of epidemic diseases .
For example , the El Niño cycle is associated with increased risks of some of the diseases transmitted by mosquitoes , such as malaria , dengue , and Rift Valley fever .
Outbreaks of another mosquito-transmitted disease , Australian encephalitis -LRB- Murray Valley encephalitis -- MVE -RRB- , occur in temperate south-east Australia after heavy rainfall and flooding , which are associated with La Niña events .
A severe outbreak of Rift Valley fever occurred after extreme rainfall in north-eastern Kenya and southern Somalia during the 1997 -- 98 El Niño .
The word flute first entered the English language during the Middle English period , as floute , or else flowte , flo -LRB- y -RRB- te , possibly from Old French flaute and from Old Provençal flaüt , or else from Old French fleüte , flaüte , flahute via Middle High German floite or Dutch fluit .
According to the Oxford English Dictionary , this was in Geoffrey Chaucer 's The Hous of Fame , c. 1380 .
The most well-documented early European team was founded by activist Nettie Honeyball in England in 1894 .
Nettie Honeyball is quoted , `` I founded the association late last year -LSB- 1894 -RSB- , with the fixed resolve of proving to the world that women are not the ` ornamental and useless ' creatures men have pictured .
I must confess , my convictions on all matters where the sexes are so widely divided are all on the side of emancipation , and I look forward to the time when ladies may sit in Parliament and have a voice in the direction of affairs , especially those which concern them most . ''
Honeyball and those like her paved the way for women 's football .
However the women 's game was frowned upon by the British football associations , and continued without their support .
It has been suggested that this was motivated by a perceived threat to the ` masculinity ' of the game .
A rectangular goal is positioned at the middle of each goal line .
The inner edges of the vertical goal posts must be 24 feet -LRB- 7.3 m -RRB- apart , and the lower edge of the horizontal crossbar supported by the goal posts must be 8 feet -LRB- 2.4 m -RRB- above the ground .
Nets are usually placed behind the goal , but are not required by the Laws .
The referee may punish a player 's or substitute 's misconduct by a caution -LRB- yellow card -RRB- or dismissal -LRB- red card -RRB- .
A second yellow card at the same game leads to a red card , and therefore to a dismissal .
A player given a yellow card is said to have been `` booked '' , the referee writing the player 's name in his official notebook .
If a player has been dismissed , no substitute can be brought on in their place .
Misconduct may occur at any time , and while the offences that constitute misconduct are listed , the definitions are broad .
In particular , the offence of `` unsporting behaviour '' may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the game , even if they are not listed as specific offences .
A referee can show a yellow or red card to a player , substitute or substituted player .
Non-players such as managers and support staff can not be shown the yellow or red card , but may be expelled from the technical area if they fail to conduct themselves in a responsible manner .
The world 's oldest football competition is the FA Cup , which was founded by C. W. Alcock and has been contested by English teams since 1872 .
The first official international football match also took place in 1872 , between Scotland and England in Glasgow , again at the instigation of C. W. Alcock .
England is also home to the world 's first football league , which was founded in Birmingham in 1888 by Aston Villa director William McGregor .
The original format contained 12 clubs from the Midlands and Northern England .
The African Union -LRB- AU -RRB- is a continental union consisting of all 55 countries on the African continent .
It was established on 26 May 2001 in Addis Ababa , Ethiopia , and launched on 9 July 2002 in South Africa , with the aim of replacing the Organisation of African Unity -LRB- OAU -RRB- .
The most important decisions of the AU are made by the Assembly of the African Union , a semi-annual meeting of the heads of state and government of its member states .
The principal topic for debate at the July 2007 AU summit held in Accra , Ghana , was the creation of a Union Government , with the aim of moving towards a United States of Africa .
A study on the Union Government was adopted in late 2006 , and proposes various options for `` completing '' the African Union project .
There are divisions among African states on the proposals , with some -LRB- notably Libya -RRB- following a maximalist view leading to a common government with an AU army ; and others -LRB- especially the southern African states -RRB- supporting rather a strengthening of the existing structures , with some reforms to deal with administrative and political challenges in making the AU Commission and other bodies truly effective .
In 2006 , the AU decided to create a Committee `` to consider the implementation of a rotation system between the regions '' in relation to the presidency .
Controversy arose at the 2006 summit when Sudan announced its candidacy for the AU 's chairmanship , as a representative of the East African region .
Several member states refused to support Sudan because of tensions over Darfur -LRB- see also below -RRB- .
Sudan ultimately withdrew its candidacy and President Denis Sassou-Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo was elected to a one-year term .
At the January 2007 summit , Sassou-Nguesso was replaced by President John Agyekum Kufuor of Ghana , despite another attempt by Sudan to gain the chair .
2007 was the 50th anniversary of Ghana 's independence , a symbolic moment for the country to hold the chair of the AU -- and to host the mid-year summit at which the proposed Union Government was also discussed .
In January 2008 , President Jakaya Kikwete of Tanzania took over as chair , representing the East African region and thus apparently ending Sudan 's attempt to become chair -- at least till the rotation returns to East Africa .
Food is any substance consumed to provide nutritional support for the body .
It is usually of plant or animal origin , and contains essential nutrients , such as carbohydrates , fats , proteins , vitamins , or minerals .
The substance is ingested by an organism and assimilated by the organism 's cells to provide energy , maintain life , or stimulate growth .
Some cultures and people do not consume meat or animal food products for cultural , dietary , health , ethical , or ideological reasons .
Vegetarians choose to forgo food from animal sources to varying degrees .
Vegans do not consume any foods that are or contain ingredients from an animal source .
Generally regarded as the most pleasant taste , sweetness is almost always caused by a type of simple sugar such as glucose or fructose , or disaccharides such as sucrose , a molecule combining glucose and fructose .
Artificial sweeteners such as sucralose are used to mimic the sugar molecule , creating the sensation of sweet , without the calories .
Other types of sugar include raw sugar , which is known for its amber color , as it is unprocessed .
Cooking requires applying heat to a food which usually , though not always , chemically changes the molecules , thus changing its flavor , texture , appearance , and nutritional properties .
Cooking certain proteins , such as egg whites , meats , and fish , denatures the protein , causing it to firm .
Boiling as a means of cooking requires a container , and has been practiced at least since the 10th millennium BC with the introduction of pottery .
Food is traded and marketed on a global basis .
The variety and availability of food is no longer restricted by the diversity of locally grown food or the limitations of the local growing season .
Some countries are now economically dependent on food exports , which in some cases account for over 80 % of all exports .
In the 20th century , supermarkets were born .
Supermarkets brought with them a self service approach to shopping using shopping carts , and were able to offer quality food at lower cost through economies of scale and reduced staffing costs .
In the latter part of the 20th century , this has been further revolutionized by the development of vast warehouse-sized , out-of-town supermarkets , selling a wide range of food from around the world .
Foodborne illness , commonly called `` food poisoning '' , is caused by bacteria , toxins , viruses , parasites , and prions .
Roughly 7 million people die of food poisoning each year , with about 10 times as many suffering from a non-fatal version .
The two most common factors leading to cases of bacterial foodborne illness are cross-contamination of ready-to-eat food from other uncooked foods and improper temperature control .
Less commonly , acute adverse reactions can also occur if chemical contamination of food occurs , for example from improper storage , or use of non-food grade soaps and disinfectants .
Food can also be adulterated by a very wide range of articles -LRB- known as `` foreign bodies '' -RRB- during farming , manufacture , cooking , packaging , distribution , or sale .
It is possible for certain types of food to become contaminated if stored or presented in an unsafe container , such as a ceramic pot with lead-based glaze .
Seeds of plants are a good source of food for animals , including humans , because they contain the nutrients necessary for the plant 's initial growth , including many healthful fats , such as omega fats .
Edible seeds include cereals -LRB- corn , wheat , rice , et cetera -RRB- , legumes -LRB- beans , peas , lentils , et cetera -RRB- , and nuts .
Oilseeds are often pressed to produce rich oils - sunflower , flaxseed , rapeseed -LRB- including canola oil -RRB- , sesame , et cetera .
In the fall of 1888 , his writings and letters began to reveal a higher estimation of his own status and `` fate '' .
In its preface -- which suggests Nietzsche was well aware of the interpretive difficulties his work would generate -- he declares , `` Hear me !
In December , Nietzsche began a correspondence with August Strindberg and thought that , short of an international breakthrough , he would attempt to buy back his older writings from the publisher and have them translated into other European languages .
Moreover , he planned the publication of the compilation Nietzsche Contra Wagner and of the poems that made up his collection Dionysian Dithyrambs .
General commentators and Nietzsche scholars , whether emphasizing his cultural background or his language , overwhelmingly label Nietzsche as a `` German philosopher '' .
Others do not assign him a national category .
When he accepted his post at Basel , Nietzsche applied for the annulment of his Prussian citizenship .
The official response confirming the revocation of his citizenship came in a document dated 17 April 1869 , and for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless .
In Beyond Good and Evil and On the Genealogy of Morality , Nietzsche 's genealogical account of the development of modern moral systems occupies a central place .
The initial form of morality was set by a warrior aristocracy and other ruling castes of ancient civilizations .
Aristocratic values of good and bad coincided with and reflected their relationship to lower castes such as slaves .
Nietzsche presents this `` master morality '' as the original system of morality -- perhaps best associated with Homeric Greece .
To be `` good '' was to be happy and to have the things related to happiness : wealth , strength , health , power , etc. .
Related to his theory of the will to power , is his speculation , which he did not deem final , regarding the reality of the physical world , including inorganic matter -- that , like man 's affections and impulses , the material world is also set by the dynamics of a form of the will to power .
At the core of his theory is a rejection of atomism -- the idea that matter is composed of stable , indivisible units -LRB- atoms -RRB- .
Instead , he seems to have accepted the conclusions of Ruđer Bošković , who explained the qualities of matter as a result of an interplay of forces .
One study of Nietzsche defines his fully developed concept of the will to power as `` the element from which derive both the quantitative difference of related forces and the quality that devolves into each force in this relation '' revealing the will to power as `` the principle of the synthesis of forces . ''
Of such forces Nietzsche said they could perhaps be viewed as a primitive form of the will .
Likewise he rejected as a mere interpretation the view that the movement of bodies is ruled by inexorable laws of nature , positing instead that movement was governed by the power relations between bodies and forces .
Other scholars disagree that Nietzsche considered the material world to be a form of the will to power .
Nietzsche thoroughly criticized metaphysics , and by including the will to power in the material world , he would simply be setting up a new metaphysics .
Other than aphorism 36 in Beyond Good and Evil , where he raised a question regarding will to power as being in the material world , it was only in his notes -LRB- unpublished by himself -RRB- , where he wrote about a metaphysical will to power .
Nietzsche directed his landlord to burn those notes in 1888 when he left Sils Maria for the last time .
However , Nietzsche referred to Kant as a `` moral fanatic '' , Plato as `` boring '' , Mill as a `` blockhead '' , and of Spinoza he said : `` How much of personal timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray ? '' .
In his Egotism in German Philosophy , Santayana claimed that Nietzsche 's whole philosophy was a reaction to Schopenhauer .
Santayana wrote that Nietzsche 's work was `` an emendation of that of Schopenhauer .
The will to live would become the will to dominate ; pessimism founded on reflection would become optimism founded on courage ; the suspense of the will in contemplation would yield to a more biological account of intelligence and taste ; finally in the place of pity and asceticism -LRB- Schopenhauer 's two principles of morals -RRB- Nietzsche would set up the duty of asserting the will at all costs and being cruelly but beautifully strong .
These points of difference from Schopenhauer cover the whole philosophy of Nietzsche . ''
According to an 1890 diagram of the firm 's new , 17th floor space atop the Auditorium Building , Wright soon earned a private office next to Sullivan 's own .
However , that office was actually shared with friend and draftsman George Elmslie , who was hired by Sullivan at Wright 's request .
Wright had risen to head draftsman and handled all residential design work in the office .
As a general rule , Adler & Sullivan did not design or build houses , but they obliged when asked by the clients of their important commercial projects .
Wright was occupied by the firm 's major commissions during office hours , so house designs were relegated to evening and weekend overtime hours at his home studio .
He would later claim total responsibility for the design of these houses , but careful inspection of their architectural style and accounts from historian Robert Twombly suggest that it was Sullivan who dictated the overall form and motifs of the residential works ; Wright 's design duties were often reduced to detailing the projects from Sullivan 's sketches .
During this time , Wright worked on Sullivan 's bungalow -LRB- 1890 -RRB- and the James A. Charnley bungalow -LRB- 1890 -RRB- both in Ocean Springs , Mississippi , the Berry-MacHarg House -LRB- 1891 -RRB- and Louis Sullivan 's House -LRB- 1892 -RRB- both in Chicago , and the most noted 1891 James A. Charnley House also in Chicago .
Wright first traveled to Japan in 1905 , where he bought hundreds of prints .
The following year , he helped organize the world 's first retrospective exhibition of works by Hiroshige , held at the Art Institute of Chicago .
For many years , he was a major presence in the Japanese art world , selling a great number of works to prominent collectors such as John Spaulding of Boston , and to prominent museums such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York .
One of Wright 's sons , Frank Lloyd Wright , Jr. , known as Lloyd Wright , was also a notable architect in Los Angeles .
His step-daughter Svetlana -LRB- daughter of Olgivanna -RRB- and her son Daniel died in an automobile accident in 1946 .
Her widower , William Wesley Peters , was later briefly married to Svetlana Alliluyeva , the youngest child and only daughter of Joseph Stalin .
Peters served as Chairman of the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation from 1985 to 1991 .
Four boarders at his parents ' apartments became Chopin 's intimates : Tytus Woyciechowski , Jan Nepomucen Białobłocki , Jan Matuszyński and Julian Fontana ; the latter two would become part of his Paris milieu .
He was friendly with members of Warsaw 's young artistic and intellectual world , including Fontana , Józef Bohdan Zaleski and Stefan Witwicki .
In letters to Woyciechowski , he indicated which of his works , and even which of their passages , were influenced by his fascination with her ; his letter of 15 May 1830 revealed that the slow movement -LRB- Larghetto -RRB- of his Piano Concerto No. 1 -LRB- in E minor -RRB- was secretly dedicated to her -- `` It should be like dreaming in beautiful springtime -- by moonlight . ''
Back in Warsaw that year , Chopin heard Niccolò Paganini play the violin , and composed a set of variations , Souvenir de Paganini .
It may have been this experience which encouraged him to commence writing his first Études , -LRB- 1829 -- 32 -RRB- , exploring the capacities of his own instrument .
His keyboard style is highly individual and often technically demanding ; his own performances were noted for their nuance and sensitivity .
Chopin invented the concept of the instrumental ballade .
His major piano works also include mazurkas , waltzes , nocturnes , polonaises , études , impromptus , scherzos , preludes and sonatas , some published only after his death .
Influences on his composition style include Polish folk music , the classical tradition of J. S. Bach , Mozart and Schubert , the music of all of whom he admired , as well as the Paris salons where he was a frequent guest .
During the summers at Nohant , particularly in the years 1839 -- 43 , Chopin found quiet , productive days during which he composed many works , including his Polonaise in A-flat major , Op. 53 .
Among the visitors to Nohant were Delacroix and the mezzo-soprano Pauline Viardot , whom Chopin had advised on piano technique and composition .
Delacroix gives an account of staying at Nohant in a letter of 7 June 1842 :
Chopin 's polonaises show a marked advance on those of his Polish predecessors in the form -LRB- who included his teachers Zywny and Elsner -RRB- .
Unlike most of their precursors , they also require a formidable playing technique .
The two mature piano sonatas -LRB- No. 2 , Op. 35 , written in 1839 and No. 3 , Op. 58 , written in 1844 -RRB- are in four movements .
The last movement , a brief -LRB- 75-bar -RRB- perpetuum mobile in which the hands play in unmodified octave unison throughout , was found shocking and unmusical by contemporaries , including Schumann .
The Op. 58 sonata is closer to the German tradition , including many passages of complex counterpoint , `` worthy of Brahms '' according to the music historians Kornel Michałowski and Jim Samson .
Chopin 's music is frequently played with rubato , `` the practice in performance of disregarding strict time , ` robbing ' some note-values for expressive effect '' .
Charles Rosen comments that `` most of the written-out indications of rubato in Chopin are to be found in his mazurkas ... It is probable that Chopin used the older form of rubato so important to Mozart ... -LSB- where -RSB- the melody note in the right hand is delayed until after the note in the bass ... An allied form of this rubato is the arpeggiation of the chords thereby delaying the melody note ; according to Chopin 's pupil , Karol Mikuli , Chopin was firmly opposed to this practice . ''
Two of Chopin 's long-standing pupils , Karol Mikuli -LRB- 1821 -- 1897 -RRB- and Georges Mathias , were themselves piano teachers and passed on details of his playing to their own students , some of whom -LRB- such as Raoul Koczalski -RRB- were to make recordings of his music .
Other pianists and composers influenced by Chopin 's style include Louis Moreau Gottschalk , Édouard Wolff -LRB- 1816 -- 1880 -RRB- and Pierre Zimmermann .
Debussy dedicated his own 1915 piano Études to the memory of Chopin ; he frequently played Chopin 's music during his studies at the Paris Conservatoire , and undertook the editing of Chopin 's piano music for the publisher Jacques Durand .
Fruits and vegetables should be kept separate from raw foods like meat , poultry , and seafood , as well as from utensils that have come in contact with raw foods .
Fruits and vegetables that are not going to be cooked should be thrown away if they have touched raw meat , poultry , seafood , or eggs .
Kafka left his work , both published and unpublished , to his friend and literary executor Max Brod with explicit instructions that it should be destroyed on Kafka 's death ; Kafka wrote : `` Dearest Max , my last request : Everything I leave behind me ... in the way of diaries , manuscripts , letters -LRB- my own and others ' -RRB- , sketches , and so on , -LSB- is -RSB- to be burned unread '' .
Brod ignored this request and published the novels and collected works between 1925 and 1935 .
He took many papers , which remain unpublished , with him in suitcases to Palestine when he fled there in 1939 .
Kafka 's last lover , Dora Diamant -LRB- later , Dymant-Lask -RRB- , also ignored his wishes , secretly keeping 20 notebooks and 35 letters .
These were confiscated by the Gestapo in 1933 , but scholars continue to search for them .
The nature of Kafka 's prose allows for varied interpretations and critics have placed his writing into a variety of literary schools .
Marxists , for example , have sharply disagreed over how to interpret Kafka 's works .
Some accused him of distorting reality whereas others claimed he was critiquing capitalism .
The hopelessness and absurdity common to his works are seen as emblematic of existentialism .
Some of Kafka 's books are influenced by the expressionist movement , though the majority of his literary output was associated with the experimental modernist genre .
William Burroughs claims that such work is centred on the concepts of struggle , pain , solitude , and the need for relationships .
According to the Marcan priority , the first to be written was the Gospel of Mark -LRB- written AD 60 -- 75 -RRB- , followed by the Gospel of Matthew -LRB- AD 65 -- 85 -RRB- , the Gospel of Luke -LRB- AD 65 -- 95 -RRB- , and the Gospel of John -LRB- AD 75 -- 100 -RRB- .
Furthermore , most scholars agree that the authors of Matthew and Luke used Mark as a source when writing their gospels .
Matthew and Luke also share some content not found in Mark .
To explain this , many scholars believe that in addition to Mark , another source -LRB- commonly called the `` Q source '' -RRB- was used by the two authors .
Jesus is called a τέκτων -LRB- tekton -RRB- in Mark 6:3 , traditionally understood as carpenter but could cover makers of objects in various materials , including builders .
The gospels indicate that Jesus could read , paraphrase , and debate scripture , but this does not necessarily mean that he received formal scribal training .
Scholars divide the ministry of Jesus into several stages .
The Galilean ministry begins when Jesus returns to Galilee from the Judaean Desert after rebuffing the temptation of Satan .
Jesus preaches around Galilee , and in Matthew 4:18 -- 20 , his first disciples , who will eventually form the core of the early Church , encounter him and begin to travel with him .
This period includes the Sermon on the Mount , one of Jesus ' major discourses , as well as the calming of the storm , the feeding of the 5,000 , walking on water and a number of other miracles and parables .
Observing a Passover custom of the time , Pilate allows one prisoner chosen by the crowd to be released .
Persuaded by the elders -LRB- Matthew 27:20 -RRB- , the mob chooses to release Barabbas and crucify Jesus .
Pilate writes a sign in Hebrew , Latin , and Greek that reads `` Jesus of Nazareth , the King of the Jews '' -LRB- abbreviated as INRI in depictions -RRB- to be affixed to Jesus ' cross -LRB- John 19:19 -- 20 -RRB- , then scourges Jesus and sends him to be crucified .
The soldiers place a Crown of Thorns on Jesus ' head and ridicule him as the King of the Jews .
They beat and taunt him before taking him to Calvary , also called Golgotha , for crucifixion .
After Lenin 's death , Stalin 's administration established an ideology known as Marxism-Leninism , a movement that came to be interpreted differently by various contending factions in the Communist movement .
After being forced into exile by Stalin 's administration , Trotsky argued that Stalinism was a debasement of Leninism , which was dominated by bureaucratism and Stalin 's own personal dictatorship .
Marxism-Leninism would be adapted to many of the 20th century 's most prominent revolutionary movements , forming into variants such as Stalinism , Maoism , Juche , Ho Chi Minh Thought , and Castroism .
Conversely , many later Western communists such as Manuel Azcárate and Jean Ellenstein who were involved in the Eurocommunist movement expressed the view that Lenin and his ideas were irrelevant to their own objectives , thereby embracing a Marxist but not Marxist-Leninist perspective .
After his exile , Lenin settled in Pskov in early 1900 .
In July 1900 , Lenin left Russia for Western Europe ; in Switzerland he met other Russian Marxists , and at a Corsier conference they agreed to launch the paper from Munich , where Lenin relocated in September .
Containing contributions from prominent European Marxists , Iskra was smuggled into Russia , becoming the country 's most successful underground publication for 50 years .
He first adopted the pseudonym `` Lenin '' in December 1901 , possibly based on the River Lena ; he often used the fuller pseudonym of `` N. Lenin '' , and while the N did not stand for anything , a popular misconception later arose that it represented `` Nikolai '' .
in 1902 ; his most influential publication to date , it dealt with Lenin 's thoughts on the need for a vanguard party to lead the proletariat to revolution .
In January 1905 , the Bloody Sunday massacre of protesters in St. Petersburg sparked a spate of civil unrest known as the Revolution of 1905 .
Lenin urged Bolsheviks to take a greater role in the events , encouraging violent insurrection .
In doing so , he adopted SR slogans regarding `` armed insurrection '' , `` mass terror '' , and `` the expropriation of gentry land '' , resulting in Menshevik accusations that he had deviated from orthodox Marxism .
In turn , he insisted that the Bolsheviks split completely with the Mensheviks , although many Bolsheviks refused and both groups attended the Third RSDLP Congress , held in London in April 1905 .
Lenin presented many of his ideas in the pamphlet Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution , published in August 1905 .
Here , he predicted that Russia 's liberal bourgeoisie would be sated by a transition to constitutional monarchy and thus betray the revolution ; instead he argued that the proletariat would have to build an alliance with the peasantry to overthrow the Tsarist regime and establish the `` provisional revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry '' .
Although he briefly supported the idea of reconciliation between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks , Lenin 's advocacy of violence and robbery was condemned by the Mensheviks at the Fourth Party Congress , held in Stockholm in April 1906 .
Lenin was involved in setting up a Bolshevik Centre in Kuokkala , Grand Duchy of Finland , which was at the time a semi-autonomous part of the Russian Empire , before the Bolsheviks regained dominance of the RSDLP at its Fifth Congress , held in London in May 1907 .
However , as the Tsarist government cracked down on opposition -- both by disbanding Russia 's legislative assembly , the Second Duma , and by ordering its secret police , the Okhrana , to arrest revolutionaries -- Lenin fled Finland for Switzerland .
The war pitted the Russian Empire against the Austro-Hungarian Empire , and due to his Russian citizenship , Lenin was arrested and briefly imprisoned until his anti-Tsarist credentials were explained .
Lenin and his wife returned to Bern , before relocating to Zürich in February 1916 .
Lenin was angry that the German Social-Democratic Party was supporting the German war effort -- a direct contravention of the Second International 's Stuttgart resolution that socialist parties would oppose the conflict -- and thus saw the Second International as defunct .
He attended the Zimmerwald Conference in September 1915 and the Kienthal Conference in April 1916 , urging socialists across the continent to convert the `` imperialist war '' into a continent-wide `` civil war '' with the proletariat pitted against the bourgeoisie and aristocracy .
In July 1916 , Lenin 's mother died , but he was unable to attend her funeral .
A decree in April 1919 resulted in the establishment of concentration camps , which were entrusted to the Cheka , although they were later administered by a new government agency , Gulag .
By the end of 1920 , 84 camps had been established across Soviet Russia , holding about 50,000 prisoners ; by October 1923 , this had grown to 315 camps and about 70,000 inmates .
Those interned in the camps were used as slave labour .
From July 1922 , intellectuals deemed to be opposing the Bolshevik government were exiled to inhospitable regions or deported from Russia altogether ; Lenin personally scrutinised the lists of those to be dealt with in this manner .
In May 1922 , Lenin issued a decree calling for the execution of anti-Bolshevik priests , causing between 14,000 and 20,000 deaths .
Although the Russian Orthodox Church was worst affected , the government 's anti-religious policies also impacted on Roman Catholic and Protestant churches , Jewish synagogues , and Islamic mosques .
In 1920 and 1921 , local opposition to requisitioning resulted in anti-Bolshevik peasant uprisings breaking out across Russia , although these were suppressed .
Among the most significant was the Tambov Rebellion , which was put down by the Red Army .
In February 1921 , workers went on strike in Petrograd , resulting in the government proclaiming martial law in the city and sending in the Red Army to quell demonstrations .
In March , the Kronstadt rebellion began when sailors in Kronstadt revolted against the Bolshevik government , demanding that all socialists be allowed to publish freely , that independent trade unions be given freedom of assembly and that peasants be allowed free markets and not be subject to requisitioning .
Lenin declared that the mutineers had been misled by the Socialist Revolutionaries and foreign imperialists , calling for violent reprisals .
Under Trotsky 's leadership , the Red Army put down the rebellion on 17 March , resulting in thousands of deaths and the internment of survivors in labour camps .
In the Western world , biographers began writing about Lenin soon after his death ; some -- like Christopher Hill -- were sympathetic to him , and others -- like Richard Pipes and Robert Gellately -- expressly hostile .
A number of later biographers , such as Read and Lars Lih , sought to avoid making either hostile or positive comments about him , thereby evading politicised stereotypes .
Among sympathisers , he was portrayed as having made a genuine adjustment of Marxist theory that enabled it to suit Russia 's particular socio-economic conditions .
The Soviet view characterised him as a man who recognised the historically inevitable and accordingly helped to make the inevitable happen .
Conversely , the majority of Western historians have perceived him as a person who manipulated events in order to attain and then retain political power , moreover considering his ideas as attempts to ideologically justify his pragmatic policies .
More recently , revisionists in both Russia and the West have highlighted the impact that pre-existing ideas and popular pressures exerted on Lenin and his policies .
All animals are heterotrophs , meaning that they feed directly or indirectly on other living things .
Animals living close to hydrothermal vents and cold seeps on the ocean floor are not dependent on the energy of sunlight .
Instead chemosynthetic archaea and bacteria form the base of the food chain .
Several animal phyla are recognized for their lack of bilateral symmetry , and are thought to have diverged from other animals early in evolution .
Among these , the sponges -LRB- Porifera -RRB- were long thought to have diverged first , representing the oldest animal phylum .
They lack the complex organization found in most other phyla .
Their cells are differentiated , but in most cases not organized into distinct tissues .
Sponges typically feed by drawing in water through pores .
However , a series of phylogenomic studies from 2008-2015 have found support for Ctenophora , or comb jellies , as the basal lineage of animals .
This result has been controversial , since it would imply that sponges may not be so primitive , but may instead be secondarily simplified .
Other researchers have argued that the placement of Ctenophora as the earliest-diverging animal phylum is a statistical anomaly caused by the high rate of evolution in ctenophore genomes .
Fascism / ˈfæʃɪzəm / is a form of radical authoritarian nationalism that came to prominence in early 20th-century Europe .
The first fascist movements emerged in Italy during World War I , before it spread to other European countries .
Opposed to liberalism , Marxism , and anarchism , fascism is usually placed on the far-right within the traditional left -- right spectrum .
French nationalist and reactionary monarchist Charles Maurras influenced fascism .
Maurras promoted what he called integral nationalism , which called for the organic unity of a nation , and Maurras insisted that a powerful monarch was an ideal leader of a nation .
Maurras distrusted what he considered the democratic mystification of the popular will that created an impersonal collective subject .
He claimed that a powerful monarch was a personified sovereign who could exercise authority to unite a nation 's people .
Maurras ' integral nationalism was idealized by fascists , but modified into a modernized revolutionary form that was devoid of Maurras ' monarchism .
The fusion of Maurrassian nationalism and Sorelian syndicalism influenced radical Italian nationalist Enrico Corradini .
Corradini spoke of the need for a nationalist-syndicalist movement , led by elitist aristocrats and anti-democrats who shared a revolutionary syndicalist commitment to direct action and a willingness to fight .
Corradini spoke of Italy as being a `` proletarian nation '' that needed to pursue imperialism in order to challenge the `` plutocratic '' French and British .
Corradini 's views were part of a wider set of perceptions within the right-wing Italian Nationalist Association -LRB- ANI -RRB- , which claimed that Italy 's economic backwardness was caused by corruption in its political class , liberalism , and division caused by `` ignoble socialism '' .
The ANI held ties and influence among conservatives , Catholics , and the business community .
Italian national syndicalists held a common set of principles : the rejection of bourgeois values , democracy , liberalism , Marxism , internationalism , and pacifism ; and the promotion of heroism , vitalism , and violence .
The ANI claimed that liberal democracy was no longer compatible with the modern world , and advocated a strong state and imperialism , claiming that humans are naturally predatory and that nations were in a constant struggle , in which only the strongest could survive .
In the 1920s , Fascist Italy pursued an aggressive foreign policy that included an attack on the Greek island of Corfu , aims to expand Italian territory in the Balkans , plans to wage war against Turkey and Yugoslavia , attempts to bring Yugoslavia into civil war by supporting Croat and Macedonian separatists to legitimize Italian intervention , and making Albania a de facto protectorate of Italy , which was achieved through diplomatic means by 1927 .
In response to revolt in the Italian colony of Libya , Fascist Italy abandoned previous liberal-era colonial policy of cooperation with local leaders .
Instead , claiming that Italians were a superior race to African races and thereby had the right to colonize the `` inferior '' Africans , it sought to settle 10 to 15 million Italians in Libya .
This resulted in an aggressive military campaign known as the Pacification of Libya against natives in Libya , including mass killings , the use of concentration camps , and the forced starvation of thousands of people .
Italian authorities committed ethnic cleansing by forcibly expelling 100,000 Bedouin Cyrenaicans , half the population of Cyrenaica in Libya , from their settlements that was slated to be given to Italian settlers .
While fascism denounced the mainstream internationalist and Marxist socialisms , it claimed to economically represent a type of nationalist productivist socialism that while condemning parasitical capitalism , was willing to accommodate productivist capitalism within it .
This was derived from Henri de Saint Simon , whose ideas inspired the creation of utopian socialism and influenced other ideologies , that stressed solidarity rather than class war and whose conception of productive people in the economy included both productive workers and productive bosses to challenge the influence of the aristocracy and unproductive financial speculators .
Saint Simon 's vision combined the traditionalist right-wing criticisms of the French Revolution combined with a left-wing belief in the need for association or collaboration of productive people in society .
Whereas Marxism condemned capitalism as a system of exploitative property relations , fascism saw the nature of the control of credit and money in the contemporary capitalist system as abusive .
Unlike Marxism , fascism did not see class conflict between the Marxist-defined proletariat and the bourgeoisie as a given or as an engine of historical materialism .
Instead , it viewed workers and productive capitalists in common as productive people who were in conflict with parasitic elements in society including : corrupt political parties , corrupt financial capital , and feeble people .
Fascist leaders such as Mussolini and Hitler spoke of the need to create a new managerial elite led by engineers and captains of industry -- but free from the parasitic leadership of industries .
Hitler stated that the Nazi Party supported bodenständigen Kapitalismus -LRB- productive capitalism -RRB- that was based upon profit earned from one 's own labour , but condemned unproductive capitalism or loan capitalism , which derived profit from speculation .
Forests sometimes contain many tree species within a small area -LRB- as in tropical rain and temperate deciduous forests -RRB- , or relatively few species over large areas -LRB- e.g. , taiga and arid montane coniferous forests -RRB- .
Forests are often home to many animal and plant species , and biomass per unit area is high compared to other vegetation communities .
Much of this biomass occurs below ground in the root systems and as partially decomposed plant detritus .
The woody component of a forest contains lignin , which is relatively slow to decompose compared with other organic materials such as cellulose or carbohydrate .
Canopy is formed by the mass of intertwined branches , twigs and leaves of the mature trees .
The crowns of the dominant trees receive most of the sunlight .
This is the most productive part of the trees where maximum food is produced .
The canopy forms a shady , protective `` umbrella '' over the rest of the forest .
The common distribution of a flame under normal gravity conditions depends on convection , as soot tends to rise to the top of a general flame , as in a candle in normal gravity conditions , making it yellow .
In micro gravity or zero gravity , such as an environment in outer space , convection no longer occurs , and the flame becomes spherical , with a tendency to become more blue and more efficient -LRB- although it may go out if not moved steadily , as the CO2 from combustion does not disperse as readily in micro gravity , and tends to smother the flame -RRB- .
There are several possible explanations for this difference , of which the most likely is that the temperature is sufficiently evenly distributed that soot is not formed and complete combustion occurs .
Experiments by NASA reveal that diffusion flames in micro gravity allow more soot to be completely oxidized after they are produced than diffusion flames on Earth , because of a series of mechanisms that behave differently in micro gravity when compared to normal gravity conditions .
These discoveries have potential applications in applied science and industry , especially concerning fuel efficiency .
Symbolism was a device to distinguish the main features of the Revolution and ensure public identification and support .
In order to effectively illustrate the differences between the new Republic and the old regime , the leaders needed to implement a new set of symbols to be celebrated instead of the old religious and monarchical symbolism .
To this end , symbols were borrowed from historic cultures and redefined , while those of the old regime were either destroyed or reattributed acceptable characteristics .
These revised symbols were used to instil in the public a new sense of tradition and reverence for the Enlightenment and the Republic .
She focused on other aspects of the government , but was a feminist by virtue of the fact that she was a woman working to influence the world .
Her personal letters to leaders of the Revolution influenced policy ; in addition , she often hosted political gatherings of the Brissotins , a political group which allowed women to join .
As she was led to the scaffold , Madame Roland shouted `` O liberty !
Freemasonry played an important role in the revolution .
Originally largely apolitical , Freemasonry was radicalised in the late 18th century through the introduction of higher grades which emphasised themes of liberty , equality , and fraternity .
Virtually every major player in the Revolution was a Freemason and these themes became the widely recognised slogan of the revolution .
It changed the course of human history , bringing an end to feudalism and making a path for future advances in broadly defined freedom of an individual .
The changes in France were enormous ; some were widely accepted and others were bitterly contested into the late 20th century .
The kings had so thoroughly centralised the system that most nobles spent their time at Versailles , and thus played only a small direct role in their home districts .
Thompson says that the kings had :
During the Revolutionary Wars , the French invaded and occupied the region between 1794 and 1814 , a time known as the French period .
The new government enforced new reforms , incorporating the region into France itself .
New rulers were sent in by Paris .
Belgian men were drafted into the French wars and heavily taxed .
Resistance was strong in every sector , as Belgian nationalism emerged to oppose French rule .
Belgium now had a government bureaucracy selected by merit .
This was not received well by the King 's ministers , and Necker , hoping to bolster his position , argued to be made a minister .
The King refused , Necker was dismissed , and Charles Alexandre de Calonne was appointed to the Comptrollership .
Calonne initially spent liberally , but he quickly realised the critical financial situation and proposed a new tax code .
The proposal included a consistent land tax , which would include taxation of the nobility and clergy .
Faced with opposition from the parlements , Calonne organised the summoning of the Assembly of Notables .
But the Assembly failed to endorse Calonne 's proposals and instead weakened his position through its criticism .
In response , the King announced the calling of the Estates-General for May 1789 , the first time the body had been summoned since 1614 .
The Assembly abolished the symbolic paraphernalia of the Ancien Régime -- armorial bearings , liveries , etc. -- which further alienated the more conservative nobles , and added to the ranks of the émigrés .
On 14 July 1790 , and for several days following , crowds in the Champ de Mars celebrated the anniversary of the fall of the Bastille with the Fête de la Fédération ; Talleyrand performed a mass ; participants swore an oath of `` fidelity to the nation , the law , and the king '' ; the King and the royal family actively participated .
The values and institutions of the Revolution dominate French politics to this day .
The Revolution resulted in the suppression of the feudal system , the emancipation of the individual , the greater division of landed property , the abolition of the privileges of noble birth and the establishment of equality .
The French Revolution differed from other revolutions in being not merely national , for it aimed at benefiting all humanity .
In order to carry out the fundamentalist program in practice , one would need a perfect understanding of the ancient language of the original text , if indeed the true text can be discerned from among variants .
Furthermore , human beings are the ones who transmit this understanding between generations .
Even if one wanted to follow the literal word of God , the need for people first to understand that word necessitates human interpretation .
Through that process human fallibility is inextricably mixed into the very meaning of the divine word .
As a result , it is impossible to follow the indisputable word of God ; one can only achieve a human understanding of God 's will .
It is the nature of the mind to make sense out of experience , to reduce the conglomerates of experience to units of comprehension which we call principles , or ideologies , or concepts .
But the mind ca n't handle these so it has to imprison religious experience in some way , get it bottled up .
Then , when the experience quiets down , the mind draws a bead on it and extracts concepts , notions , dogmas , so that religious experience can make sense to the mind .
Meanwhile religious experience goes on experiencing , so that by the time I get my dogma stated so that I can think about it , the religious experience becomes an object of thought .
Extremism within Islam goes back to the 7th century to the time of the Kharijites .
From their essentially political position , they developed extreme doctrines that set them apart from both mainstream Sunni and Shia Muslims .
The Kharijites were particularly noted for adopting a radical approach to Takfir , whereby they declared other Muslims to be unbelievers and therefore deemed them worthy of death .
Dostoyevsky served four years of exile with hard labour at a katorga prison camp in Omsk , Siberia , followed by a term of compulsory military service .
After a fourteen-day sleigh ride , the prisoners reached Tobolsk , a prisoner way station .
Despite the circumstances , Dostoyevsky consoled the other prisoners , such as the Petrashevist Ivan Yastrzhembsky , who was surprised by Dostoyevsky 's kindness and eventually abandoned his decision to commit suicide .
In Tobolsk , the members received food and clothes from the Decembrist women , as well as several copies of the New Testament with a ten-ruble banknote inside each copy .
Eleven days later , Dostoyevsky reached Omsk together with just one other member of the Petrashevsky Circle , the poet Sergei Durov .
Dostoyevsky described his barracks :
After hearing news that the socialist revolutionary group `` People 's Vengeance '' had murdered one of its own members , Ivan Ivanov , on 21 November 1869 , Dostoyevsky began writing Demons .
In 1871 , Dostoyevsky and Anna travelled by train to Berlin .
During the trip , he burnt several manuscripts , including those of The Idiot , because he was concerned about potential problems with customs .
The family arrived in Saint Petersburg on 8 July , marking the end of a honeymoon -LRB- originally planned for three months -RRB- that had lasted over four years .
Back in Russia in July 1871 , the family was again in financial trouble and had to sell their remaining possessions .
Their son Fyodor was born on 16 July , and they moved to an apartment near the Institute of Technology soon after .
Anna proposed that they raise money on her husband 's copyrights and negotiate with the creditors to pay off their debts in installments .
On 3 February 1880 Dostoyevsky was elected vice-president of the Slavic Benevolent Society , and he was invited to speak at the unveiling of the Pushkin memorial in Moscow .
His speech was met with thunderous applause , and even his long-time rival Turgenev embraced him .
Konstantin Staniukovich praised the speech in his essay `` The Pushkin Anniversary and Dostoyevsky 's Speech '' in The Business , writing that `` the language of Dostoyevsky 's -LSB- Pushkin Speech -RSB- really looks like a sermon .
He makes a sermon like a pastor ; it is very deep , sincere , and we understand that he wants to impress the emotions of his listeners . ''
The speech was criticised later by liberal political scientist Alexander Gradovsky , who thought that Dostoyevsky idolised `` the people '' , and by conservative thinker Konstantin Leontiev , who , in his essay `` On Universal Love '' , compared the speech to French utopian socialism .
On 25 January 1881 , while searching for members of the terrorist organisation Narodnaya Volya -LRB- `` The People 's Will '' -RRB- who would soon assassinate Tsar Alexander II , the Tsar 's secret police executed a search warrant in the apartment of one of Dostoyevsky 's neighbours .
On the following day , Dostoyevsky suffered a pulmonary haemorrhage .
Anna denied that the search had caused it , saying that the haemorrhage had occurred after her husband had been looking for a dropped pen holder .
After another haemorrhage , Anna called the doctors , who gave a poor prognosis .
Dostoyevsky could at times , in his fiction , diaries and articles , be viciously antisemitic and yet , on other occasions , write appreciatively of Jews or defend their rights .
His Diaries often express hostility to Jews , but he wrote powerful attacks on the noted journalist Ivan Aksakov when the latter 's newspaper published antisemitic tirades .
In a review of scholar Joseph Frank 's -LRB- ru -RRB- book The Mantle of the Prophet , Orlando Figes states that A Writer 's Diary is `` filled with politics , literary criticism , and pan-Slav diatribes about the virtues of the Russian Empire , -LSB- and -RSB- represents a major challenge to the Dostoyevsky fan , not least on account of its frequent expressions of antisemitism . ''
In his foreword for David I. Goldstein 's book Dostoevsky and the Jews , Frank painted Dostoyevsky as a product of his time , noting that Dostoyevsky made antisemitic remarks , but was not entirely comfortable with these views .
In his semi-autobiographical Notes from the House of the Dead the protagonist has a friendship with a Jew , Isaiah Fomitch Bumstein , who is portrayed in a positive manner : ` We were great friends : his good-humour was inexhaustible ' .
Furthermore , political revolution also made impact on fashion trend .
For example , during the 1960s the economy had become wealthier , divorce rate was increasing and government approved the birth control pill .
This revolution inspired younger generation to rebellion .
In 1964 , the leg-baring miniskirt has become a major fashion trend of the 1960s .
Given that fashion designers began to experiment with the shapes of garment , loose sleeveless , micro-minis , flared skirts , and trumpet sleeves .
In this case , mini-skirt trend became an icon of the 1960s .
Fashion trend goes beyond the aesthetic values , it emerges as an expressive tool for designers to deliver their message about the society .
With the influence of social media , celebrities and bloggers , their voice are easily being heard and have impact on fashion and trend at any time .
Prabal Gurung highlighted the importance of music to his shows , saying `` each season we want to tell a story for 10 minutes ... .
Music is a representation of fashion that expresses the abstract design concept into relatable harmony for viewers .
Consumption as a share of gross domestic product in China has fallen for six decades , from 76 percent in 1952 to 28 percent in 2011 .
China plans to reduce tariffs on a number of consumer goods and expand its 72-hour transit visa plan to more cities in an effort to stimulate domestic consumption .
Consumers all have different needs and demands that have to be suited .
A person 's needs change frequently , which is why fashion trends even exist .
Gender , age , income , and even profession can help a company better understand the needs of their customers .
A few days after the 2010 Fall Fashion Week in New York City came to a close , The New Islander 's Fashion Editor , Genevieve Tax , criticized the fashion industry for running on a seasonal schedule of its own , largely at the expense of real-world consumers .
`` Because designers release their fall collections in the spring and their spring collections in the fall , fashion magazines such as Vogue always and only look forward to the upcoming season , promoting parkas come September while issuing reviews on shorts in January '' , she writes .
`` Savvy shoppers , consequently , have been conditioned to be extremely , perhaps impractically , farsighted with their buying . ''
Anthropology , the study of culture and human societies , studies fashion by asking why certain styles are deemed socially appropriate and others are not .
A certain way is chosen and that becomes the fashion as defined by a certain people as a whole , so if a particular style has a meaning in an already occurring set of beliefs that style will become fashion .
According to Ted Polhemus and Lynn Procter , fashion can be described as adornment , of which there are two types : fashion and anti-fashion .
Since they generally have a poor sense of smell , the olfactory chamber is small , although it does contain three turbinates , which sometimes have a complex structure similar to that of mammals .
In many birds , including doves and fowls , the nostrils are covered by a horny protective shield .
The vomeronasal organ of birds is either under-developed or altogether absent , depending on the species .
The earliest evidence of cheese-making in the archaeological record dates back to 5,500 BCE , in what is now Kujawy , Poland , where strainers with milk fats molecules have been found .
Earliest proposed dates for the origin of cheesemaking range from around 8000 BCE , when sheep were first domesticated .
Since animal skins and inflated internal organs have , since ancient times , provided storage vessels for a range of foodstuffs , it is probable that the process of cheese making was discovered accidentally by storing milk in a container made from the stomach of an animal , resulting in the milk being turned to curd and whey by the rennet from the stomach .
There is a legend -- with variations -- about the discovery of cheese by an Arab trader who used this method of storing milk .
He curdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers .
Other techniques influence a cheese 's texture and flavor .
Cheese has the potential for promoting the growth of Listeria bacteria .
Listeria monocytogenes can also cause serious infection in an infant and pregnant woman and can be transmitted to her infant in utero or after birth .
The infection has the potential of seriously harming or even causing the death of a preterm infant , an infant of low or very low birth weight , or an infant with an immune system deficiency or a congenital defect of the immune system .
The presence of this pathogen can sometimes be determined by the symptoms that appear as a gastrointestinal illness in the mother .
The mother can also acquire infection from ingesting food that contains other animal products such as , unpasteurized milk , delicatessen meats , and hot dogs .
A specialist seller of cheese is sometimes known as a cheesemonger .
Becoming an expert in this field requires some formal education and years of tasting and hands-on experience , much like becoming an expert in wine or cuisine .
Body size , shape and style has changed over time .
19th century guitars , now known as salon guitars , were smaller than modern instruments .
Differing patterns of internal bracing have been used over time by luthiers .
Bracing not only strengthens the top against potential collapse due to the stress exerted by the tensioned strings , but also affects the resonance characteristics of the top .
The back and sides are made out of a variety of timbers such as mahogany , Indian rosewood and highly regarded Brazilian rosewood -LRB- Dalbergia nigra -RRB- .
Each one is primarily chosen for their aesthetic effect and can be decorated with inlays and purfling .
Before the development of the electric guitar and the use of synthetic materials , a guitar was defined as being an instrument having `` a long , fretted neck , flat wooden soundboard , ribs , and a flat back , most often with incurved sides . ''
The term is used to refer to a number of chordophones that were developed and used across Europe , beginning in the 12th century and , later , in the Americas .
A 3,300-year-old stone carving of a Hittite bard playing a stringed instrument is the oldest iconographic representation of a chordophone and clay plaques from Babylonia show people playing an instrument that has a strong resemblance to the guitar , indicating a possible Babylonian origin for the guitar .
Pickups are transducers attached to a guitar that detect -LRB- or `` pick up '' -RRB- string vibrations and convert the mechanical energy of the string into electrical energy .
These contain magnets that are tightly wrapped in a coil , or coils , of copper wire .
Electromagnetic pickups work on the same principles and in a similar manner to an electrical generator .
The vibration of the strings creates a small voltage in the coils surrounding the magnets .
This signal voltage is carried to a guitar amplifier that drives a loudspeaker .
Single-coil pickups are susceptible to noise induced from electric fields , usually mains-frequency -LRB- 60 or 50 hertz -RRB- hum .
The introduction of the double-coil humbucker in the mid-1950s did away with this problem through the use of two coils , one of which is wired in a reverse polarity orientation .
On the other hand , some chords are more difficult to play in a regular tuning than in standard tuning .
It can be difficult to play conventional chords especially in augmented-fourths tuning and all-fifths tuning , in which the large spacings require hand stretching .
Some chords , which are conventional in folk music , are difficult to play even in all-fourths and major-thirds tunings , which do not require more hand-stretching than standard tuning .
Electric guitars and bass guitars have to be used with a guitar amplifier and loudspeaker or a bass amplifier and speaker , respectively , in order to make enough sound to be heard by the performer and audience .
Electric guitars and bass guitars almost always use magnetic pickups , which generate an electric signal when the musician plucks , strums or otherwise plays the instrument .
The amplifier and speaker strengthen this signal using a power amplifier and a loudspeaker .
Acoustic guitars that are equipped with a piezoelectric pickup or microphone can also be plugged into an instrument amplifier , acoustic guitar amp or PA system to make them louder .
With electric guitar and bass , the amplifier and speaker are not just used to make the instrument louder ; by adjusting the equalizer controls , the preamplifier , and any onboard effects units -LRB- reverb , distortion/overdrive , etc. -RRB- the player can also modify the tone -LRB- aka timbre or `` colour '' -RRB- and sound of the instrument .
Acoustic guitar players can also use the amp to change the sound of their instrument , but in general , acoustic guitar amps are used to make the natural acoustic sound of the instrument louder without changing its sound that much .
The area in central Europe where the majority of the population speaks German as a first language and has German as a -LRB- co - -RRB- official language is called the `` German Sprachraum '' .
Mostly originating from different waves of immigration during the 19th and 20th centuries , an estimated 12,000 people speak German or a German variety as a first language in South Africa .
One of the largest communities consists of the speakers of `` Nataler Deutsch '' , a variety of Low German , concentrated in and around Wartburg .
The small town of Kroondal in the North-West Province also has a mostly German speaking population .
The South African constitution identifies German as a `` commonly used '' language and the Pan South African Language Board is obligated to promote and ensure respect for it .
The community is strong enough that several German International schools are supported such as the Deutsche Schule Pretoria .
In German orthography , nouns and most words with the syntactical function of nouns are capitalised to make it easier for readers to determine the function of a word within a sentence -LRB- Am Freitag ging ich einkaufen .
This convention is almost unique to German today -LRB- shared perhaps only by the closely related Luxembourgish language and several insular dialects of the North Frisian language -RRB- , but it was historically common in other languages such as Danish -LRB- which abolished the capitalization of nouns in 1948 -RRB- and English .
In the modern era , the Greek language entered a state of diglossia : the coexistence of vernacular and archaizing written forms of the language .
What came to be known as the Greek language question was a polarization between two competing varieties of Modern Greek : Dimotiki , the vernacular form of Modern Greek proper , and Katharevousa , meaning ` purified ' , a compromise between Dimotiki and Ancient Greek , which was developed in the early 19th century and was used for literary and official purposes in the newly formed Greek state .
In 1976 , Dimotiki was declared the official language of Greece , having incorporated features of Katharevousa and giving birth to Standard Modern Greek , which is used today for all official purposes and in education .
The historical unity and continuing identity between the various stages of the Greek language is often emphasised .
Although Greek has undergone morphological and phonological changes comparable to those seen in other languages , never since classical antiquity has its cultural , literary , and orthographic tradition been interrupted to the extent that one can speak of a new language emerging .
Greek speakers today still tend to regard literary works of ancient Greek as part of their own rather than a foreign language .
It is also often stated that the historical changes have been relatively slight compared with some other languages .
The Greek language holds an important place in the history of the Western world and Christianity ; the canon of ancient Greek literature includes seminal works in the Western canon such as the epic poems Iliad and Odyssey .
Greek is also the language in which many of the foundational texts in science , especially astronomy , mathematics and logic , and Western philosophy , such as the Platonic dialogues and the works of Aristotle , are composed ; the New Testament of the Holy Bible was written in Koiné Greek .
Together with the Latin texts and traditions of the Roman world , the study of the Greek texts and society of antiquity constitutes the discipline of Classics .
Many betting systems have been created in an attempt to `` beat the house '' but no system can make a mathematically unprofitable bet in terms of expected value profitable over time .
Widely used systems include :
Because contracts of insurance have many features in common with wagers , insurance contracts are often distinguished under law as agreements in which either party has an interest in the `` bet-upon '' outcome beyond the specific financial terms .
e.g. : a `` bet '' with an insurer on whether one 's house will burn down is not gambling , but rather insurance -- as the homeowner has an obvious interest in the continued existence of his/her home independent of the purely financial aspects of the `` bet '' -LRB- i.e. , the insurance policy -RRB- .
Nonetheless , both insurance and gambling contracts are typically considered aleatory contracts under most legal systems , though they are subject to different types of regulation .
Washington was initiated into Freemasonry in 1752 .
The American lodges did not share the anti-clerical perspective that made the European lodges so controversial .
In 1777 , a convention of Virginia lodges recommended Washington to be the Grand Master of the newly established Grand Lodge of Virginia ; he declined , however , due to his responsibility in leading the Continental Army at a critical stage .
In 1788 , Washington was named Master in the Virginia charter of Alexandria Lodge No. 22 , with his personal consent .
Washington 's introduction to surveying began at an early age through school exercises that taught him the basics of the profession , followed by practical experience in the field .
His first experiences at surveying occurred in the territory surrounding Mount Vernon .
His first opportunity as a surveyor occurred in 1748 when he was invited to join a survey party organized by his neighbor and friend George Fairfax of Belvoir .
Fairfax organized a professional surveying party to lay out large tracts of land along the border of western Virginia , where the young Washington gained invaluable experience in the field .
In 1758 , Washington participated in the Forbes Expedition to capture Fort Duquesne .
He was embarrassed by a friendly fire episode in which his unit and another British unit each thought that the other was the French enemy and opened fire , with 14 dead and 26 wounded in the mishap .
Washington was not involved in any other major fighting on the expedition , and the British scored a major strategic victory , gaining control of the Ohio Valley when the French abandoned the fort .
After victory had been finalized in 1783 , Washington resigned as commander-in-chief rather than seize power , proving his opposition to dictatorship and his commitment to American republicanism .
Washington presided over the Constitutional Convention in 1787 , which devised a new form of federal government for the United States .
Following his election as president in 1789 , he worked to unify rival factions in the fledgling nation .
He supported Alexander Hamilton 's programs to satisfy all debts , federal and state , established a permanent seat of government , implemented an effective tax system , and created a national bank .
He retired from the presidency in 1797 , returning to his home and plantation at Mount Vernon .
Upon his death , Washington was eulogized as `` first in war , first in peace , and first in the hearts of his countrymen '' by Representative Henry Lee III of Virginia .
The angle between a line and a curve -LRB- mixed angle -RRB- or between two intersecting curves -LRB- curvilinear angle -RRB- is defined to be the angle between the tangents at the point of intersection .
Potentially , an angle denoted , say , ∠ BAC might refer to any of four angles : the clockwise angle from B to C , the anticlockwise angle from B to C , the clockwise angle from C to B , or the anticlockwise angle from C to B , where the direction in which the angle is measured determines its sign -LRB- see Positive and negative angles -RRB- .
Otherwise , a convention may be adopted so that ∠ BAC always refers to the anticlockwise -LRB- positive -RRB- angle from B to C , and ∠ CAB to the anticlockwise -LRB- positive -RRB- angle from C to B.
Given both Einstein 's equations and suitable equations for the properties of matter , such a solution consists of a specific semi-Riemannian manifold -LRB- usually defined by giving the metric in specific coordinates -RRB- , and specific matter fields defined on that manifold .
Matter and geometry must satisfy Einstein 's equations , so in particular , the matter 's energy -- momentum tensor must be divergence-free .
The matter must , of course , also satisfy whatever additional equations were imposed on its properties .
In short , such a solution is a model universe that satisfies the laws of general relativity , and possibly additional laws governing whatever matter might be present .
Given the difficulty of finding exact solutions , Einstein 's field equations are also solved frequently by numerical integration on a computer , or by considering small perturbations of exact solutions .
In the field of numerical relativity , powerful computers are employed to simulate the geometry of spacetime and to solve Einstein 's equations for interesting situations such as two colliding black holes .
In principle , such methods may be applied to any system , given sufficient computer resources , and may address fundamental questions such as naked singularities .
Approximate solutions may also be found by perturbation theories such as linearized gravity and its generalization , the post-Newtonian expansion , both of which were developed by Einstein .
The latter provides a systematic approach to solving for the geometry of a spacetime that contains a distribution of matter that moves slowly compared with the speed of light .
The expansion involves a series of terms ; the first terms represent Newtonian gravity , whereas the later terms represent ever smaller corrections to Newton 's theory due to general relativity .
An extension of this expansion is the parametrized post-Newtonian -LRB- PPN -RRB- formalism , which allows quantitative comparisons between the predictions of general relativity and alternative theories .
Some exact solutions describe gravitational waves without any approximation , e.g. , a wave train traveling through empty space or Gowdy universes , varieties of an expanding cosmos filled with gravitational waves .
But for gravitational waves produced in astrophysically relevant situations , such as the merger of two black holes , numerical methods are presently the only way to construct appropriate models .
Aware of the importance of causal structure , Roger Penrose and others developed what is known as global geometry .
Rather , relations that hold true for all geodesics , such as the Raychaudhuri equation , and additional non-specific assumptions about the nature of matter -LRB- usually in the form of energy conditions -RRB- are used to derive general results .
Early studies of black holes relied on explicit solutions of Einstein 's equations , notably the spherically symmetric Schwarzschild solution -LRB- used to describe a static black hole -RRB- and the axisymmetric Kerr solution -LRB- used to describe a rotating , stationary black hole , and introducing interesting features such as the ergosphere -RRB- .
Using global geometry , later studies have revealed more general properties of black holes .
This is stated by the black hole uniqueness theorems : `` black holes have no hair '' , that is , no distinguishing marks like the hairstyles of humans .
Irrespective of the complexity of a gravitating object collapsing to form a black hole , the object that results -LRB- having emitted gravitational waves -RRB- is very simple .
Another general feature of general relativity is the appearance of spacetime boundaries known as singularities .
Spacetime can be explored by following up on timelike and lightlike geodesics -- all possible ways that light and particles in free fall can travel .
But some solutions of Einstein 's equations have `` ragged edges '' -- regions known as spacetime singularities , where the paths of light and falling particles come to an abrupt end , and geometry becomes ill-defined .
In the more interesting cases , these are `` curvature singularities '' , where geometrical quantities characterizing spacetime curvature , such as the Ricci scalar , take on infinite values .
Well-known examples of spacetimes with future singularities -- where worldlines end -- are the Schwarzschild solution , which describes a singularity inside an eternal static black hole , or the Kerr solution with its ring-shaped singularity inside an eternal rotating black hole .
The Friedmann -- Lemaître -- Robertson -- Walker solutions and other spacetimes describing universes have past singularities on which worldlines begin , namely Big Bang singularities , and some have future singularities -LRB- Big Crunch -RRB- as well .
To understand Einstein 's equations as partial differential equations , it is helpful to formulate them in a way that describes the evolution of the universe over time .
This is done in `` 3 +1 '' formulations , where spacetime is split into three space dimensions and one time dimension .
These decompositions show that the spacetime evolution equations of general relativity are well-behaved : solutions always exist , and are uniquely defined , once suitable initial conditions have been specified .
Attempts to generalize ordinary quantum field theories , used in elementary particle physics to describe fundamental interactions , so as to include gravity have led to serious problems .
Some have argued that at low energies , this approach proves successful , in that it results in an acceptable effective -LRB- quantum -RRB- field theory of gravity .
At very high energies , however , the perturbative results are badly divergent and lead to models devoid of predictive power -LRB- `` perturbative non-renormalizability '' -RRB- .
Conversely , one might expect that inertial motions , once identified by observing the actual motions of bodies and making allowances for the external forces -LRB- such as electromagnetism or friction -RRB- , can be used to define the geometry of space , as well as a time coordinate .
However , there is an ambiguity once gravity comes into play .
According to Newton 's law of gravity , and independently verified by experiments such as that of Eötvös and its successors -LRB- see Eötvös experiment -RRB- , there is a universality of free fall -LRB- also known as the weak equivalence principle , or the universal equality of inertial and passive-gravitational mass -RRB- : the trajectory of a test body in free fall depends only on its position and initial speed , but not on any of its material properties .
A simplified version of this is embodied in Einstein 's elevator experiment , illustrated in the figure on the right : for an observer in a small enclosed room , it is impossible to decide , by mapping the trajectory of bodies such as a dropped ball , whether the room is at rest in a gravitational field , or in free space aboard a rocket that is accelerating at a rate equal to that of the gravitational field .
He was highly influential in the development of theoretical computer science , providing a formalisation of the concepts of algorithm and computation with the Turing machine , which can be considered a model of a general purpose computer .
Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence .
He was known to his colleagues as ` Prof ' and his treatise on Enigma was known as ` The Prof 's Book ' .
Jack Good , a cryptanalyst who worked with him , is quoted by Ronald Lewin as having said of Turing :
During his absence , Hugh Alexander had officially assumed the position of head of Hut 8 , although Alexander had been de facto head for some time -LRB- Turing having little interest in the day-to-day running of the section -RRB- .
Turing then became a general consultant for cryptanalysis at Bletchley Park .
In 1948 Turing , working with his former undergraduate colleague , D. G. Champernowne , began writing a chess program for a computer that did not yet exist .
By 1950 , the program was completed and dubbed the Turochamp .
In 1952 , he tried to implement it on a Ferranti Mark 1 , but lacking enough power , the computer was unable to execute the program .
Instead , Turing played a game in which he simulated the computer , taking about half an hour per move .
The program lost to Turing 's colleague Alick Glennie , although it is said that it won a game against Champernowne 's wife .
Turing was born in Maida Vale , London , while his father , Julius Mathison Turing -LRB- 1873 -- 1947 -RRB- , was on leave from his position with the Indian Civil Service -LRB- ICS -RRB- at Chhatrapur , Bihar and Orissa Province , in British India .
Turing 's father was the son of a clergyman , the Rev. John Robert Turing , from a Scottish family of merchants that had been based in the Netherlands and included a baronet .
The Stoneys were a Protestant Anglo-Irish gentry family from both County Tipperary and County Longford , while Ethel herself had spent much of her childhood in County Clare .
Turing 's conviction led to the removal of his security clearance and barred him from continuing with his cryptographic consultancy for the Government Communications Headquarters -LRB- GCHQ -RRB- , the British signals intelligence agency that had evolved from GC&CS in 1946 -LRB- though he kept his academic job -RRB- .
Turing was never accused of espionage , but in common with all who had worked at Bletchley Park , he was prevented by the Official Secrets Act from discussing his war work .
Thousands of people have come together to demand justice for Alan Turing and recognition of the appalling way he was treated .
While Turing was dealt with under the law of the time and we ca n't put the clock back , his treatment was of course utterly unfair and I am pleased to have the chance to say how deeply sorry I and we all are for what happened to him ... So on behalf of the British government , and all those who live freely thanks to Alan 's work I am very proud to say : we 're sorry , you deserved so much better .
Heron -LRB- or Hero -RRB- of Alexandria found what is known as Heron 's formula for the area of a triangle in terms of its sides , and a proof can be found in his book , Metrica , written around 60 CE .
It has been suggested that Archimedes knew the formula over two centuries earlier , and since Metrica is a collection of the mathematical knowledge available in the ancient world , it is possible that the formula predates the reference given in that work .
Petrologists can also use fluid inclusion data and perform high temperature and pressure physical experiments to understand the temperatures and pressures at which different mineral phases appear , and how they change through igneous and metamorphic processes .
This research can be extrapolated to the field to understand metamorphic processes and the conditions of crystallization of igneous rocks .
This work can also help to explain processes that occur within the Earth , such as subduction and magma chamber evolution .
Geologists also obtain data through stratigraphy , boreholes , core samples , and ice cores .
Ice cores and sediment cores are used to for paleoclimate reconstructions , which tell geologists about past and present temperature , precipitation , and sea level across the globe .
Seismologists can use the arrival times of seismic waves in reverse to image the interior of the Earth .
Early advances in this field showed the existence of a liquid outer core -LRB- where shear waves were not able to propagate -RRB- and a dense solid inner core .
These advances led to the development of a layered model of the Earth , with a crust and lithosphere on top , the mantle below -LRB- separated within itself by seismic discontinuities at 410 and 660 kilometers -RRB- , and the outer core and inner core below that .
More recently , seismologists have been able to create detailed images of wave speeds inside the earth in the same way a doctor images a body in a CT scan .
These images have led to a much more detailed view of the interior of the Earth , and have replaced the simplified layered model with a much more dynamic model .
Countries with monarchy attributes are those where a family or group of families -LRB- rarely another type of group -RRB- , called the royalty , represents national identity , with power traditionally assigned to one of its individuals , called the monarch , who mostly rule kingdoms .
The actual role of the monarch and other members of royalty varies from purely symbolical -LRB- crowned republic -RRB- to partial and restricted -LRB- constitutional monarchy -RRB- to completely despotic -LRB- absolute monarchy -RRB- .
Gold is attacked by and dissolves in alkaline solutions of potassium or sodium cyanide , to form the salt gold cyanide -- a technique that has been used in extracting metallic gold from ores in the cyanide process .
Gold cyanide is the electrolyte used in commercial electroplating of gold onto base metals and electroforming .
The apparent paradox of the actual toxicology of the substance suggests the possibility of serious gaps in the understanding of the action of gold in physiology .
Only salts and radioisotopes of gold are of pharmacological value , since elemental -LRB- metallic -RRB- gold is inert to all chemicals it encounters inside the body -LRB- i.e. , ingested gold can not be attacked by stomach acid -RRB- .
Some gold salts do have anti-inflammatory properties and at present two are still used as pharmaceuticals in the treatment of arthritis and other similar conditions in the US -LRB- sodium aurothiomalate and auranofin -RRB- .
These drugs have been explored as a means to help to reduce the pain and swelling of rheumatoid arthritis , and also -LRB- historically -RRB- against tuberculosis and some parasites .
Gold alloys are used in restorative dentistry , especially in tooth restorations , such as crowns and permanent bridges .
The gold alloys ' slight malleability facilitates the creation of a superior molar mating surface with other teeth and produces results that are generally more satisfactory than those produced by the creation of porcelain crowns .
The use of gold crowns in more prominent teeth such as incisors is favored in some cultures and discouraged in others .
Bills -LRB- that mature into gold coin -RRB- and gold certificates -LRB- convertible into gold coin at the issuing bank -RRB- added to the circulating stock of gold standard money in most 19th century industrial economies .
In preparation for World War I the warring nations moved to fractional gold standards , inflating their currencies to finance the war effort .
Post-war , the victorious countries , most notably Britain , gradually restored gold-convertibility , but international flows of gold via bills of exchange remained embargoed ; international shipments were made exclusively for bilateral trades or to pay war reparations .
The oldest known map of a gold mine was drawn in the 19th Dynasty of Ancient Egypt -LRB- 1320 -- 1200 BCE -RRB- , whereas the first written reference to gold was recorded in the 12th Dynasty around 1900 BCE .
Egyptian hieroglyphs from as early as 2600 BC describe gold , which King Tushratta of the Mitanni claimed was `` more plentiful than dirt '' in Egypt .
One of the earliest known maps , known as the Turin Papyrus Map , shows the plan of a gold mine in Nubia together with indications of the local geology .
The primitive working methods are described by both Strabo and Diodorus Siculus , and included fire-setting .
During Mansa Musa 's -LRB- ruler of the Mali Empire from 1312 to 1337 -RRB- hajj to Mecca in 1324 , he passed through Cairo in July 1324 , and was reportedly accompanied by a camel train that included thousands of people and nearly a hundred camels where he gave away so much gold that it depressed the price in Egypt for over a decade , causing high inflation .
Another recent study has claimed water in faults vaporizes during an earthquake , depositing gold .
When an earthquake strikes , it moves along a fault .
Water often lubricates faults , filling in fractures and jogs .
About 6 miles -LRB- 10 kilometers -RRB- below the surface , under incredible temperatures and pressures , the water carries high concentrations of carbon dioxide , silica , and gold .
During an earthquake , the fault jog suddenly opens wider .
The water inside the void instantly vaporizes , flashing to steam and forcing silica , which forms the mineral quartz , and gold out of the fluids and onto nearby surfaces .
The first synthesis of gold was conducted by Japanese physicist Hantaro Nagaoka , who synthesized gold from mercury in 1924 by neutron bombardment .
An American team , working without knowledge of Nagaoka 's prior study , conducted the same experiment in 1941 , achieving the same result and showing that the isotopes of gold produced by it were all radioactive .
Gold metal was voted Allergen of the Year in 2001 by the American Contact Dermatitis Society .
Gold contact allergies affect mostly women .
Leibniz asserted that the truths of theology -LRB- religion -RRB- and philosophy can not contradict each other , since reason and faith are both `` gifts of God '' so that their conflict would imply God contending against himself .
The Theodicy is Leibniz 's attempt to reconcile his personal philosophical system with his interpretation of the tenets of Christianity .
This project was motivated in part by Leibniz 's belief , shared by many conservative philosophers and theologians during the Enlightenment , in the rational and enlightened nature of the Christian religion as compared to its purportedly less advanced non-Western counterparts .
It was also shaped by Leibniz 's belief in the perfectibility of human nature -LRB- if humanity relied on correct philosophy and religion as a guide -RRB- , and by his belief that metaphysical necessity must have a rational or logical foundation , even if this metaphysical causality seemed inexplicable in terms of physical necessity -LRB- the natural laws identified by science -RRB- .
The use of infinitesimals in mathematics was frowned upon by followers of Karl Weierstrass , but survived in science and engineering , and even in rigorous mathematics , via the fundamental computational device known as the differential .
Beginning in 1960 , Abraham Robinson worked out a rigorous foundation for Leibniz 's infinitesimals , using model theory , in the context of a field of hyperreal numbers .
The resulting non-standard analysis can be seen as a belated vindication of Leibniz 's mathematical reasoning .
Robinson 's transfer principle is a mathematical implementation of Leibniz 's heuristic law of continuity , while the standard part function implements the Leibnizian transcendental law of homogeneity .
The principle of sufficient reason has been invoked in recent cosmology , and his identity of indiscernibles in quantum mechanics , a field some even credit him with having anticipated in some sense .
In 148 , when he was 19 , his father died , leaving him independently wealthy .
Galen claims that the High Priest chose him over other physicians after he eviscerated an ape and challenged other physicians to repair the damage .
When they refused , Galen performed the surgery himself and in so doing won the favor of the High Priest of Asia .
Over his four years there he learned the importance of diet , fitness , hygiene and preventive measures , as well as living anatomy , and the treatment of fractures and severe trauma , referring to their wounds as `` windows into the body '' .
Only five deaths among the gladiators occurred while he held the post , compared to sixty in his predecessor 's time , a result that is in general ascribed to the attention he paid to their wounds .
Ashoka ruled for an estimated 36 years and died in 232 BCE .
Legend states that during his cremation , his body burned for seven days and nights .
After his death , the Mauryan dynasty lasted just fifty more years until his empire stretched over almost all of the Indian subcontinent .
Ashoka had many wives and children , but many of their names are lost to time .
Bindusara 's death in 272 BCE led to a war over succession .
According to the Divyavadana , Bindusara wanted his elder son Susima to succeed him but Ashoka was supported by his father 's ministers , who found Susima to be arrogant and disrespectful towards them .
A minister named Radhagupta seems to have played an important role in Ashoka 's rise to the throne .
The Ashokavadana recounts Radhagupta 's offering of an old royal elephant to Ashoka for him to ride to the Garden of the Gold Pavilion where King Bindusara would determine his successor .
Ashoka later got rid of the legitimate heir to the throne by tricking him into entering a pit filled with live coals .
Radhagupta , according to the Ashokavadana , would later be appointed prime minister by Ashoka once he had gained the throne .
The Dipavansa and Mahavansa refer to Ashoka 's killing 99 of his brothers , sparing only one , named Vitashoka or Tissa , although there is no clear proof about this incident -LRB- many such accounts are saturated with mythological elements -RRB- .
The coronation happened in 269 BCE , four years after his succession to the throne .
Most copper is mined or extracted as copper sulfides from large open pit mines in porphyry copper deposits that contain 0.4 to 1.0 % copper .
Sites include Chuquicamata in Chile , Bingham Canyon Mine in Utah , United States and El Chino Mine in New Mexico , United States .
According to the British Geological Survey in 2005 , Chile was the top producer of copper with at least one-third world share followed by the United States , Indonesia and Peru .
Copper can also be recovered through the in-situ leach process .
Several sites in the state of Arizona are considered prime candidates for this method .
The amount of copper in use is increasing and the quantity available is barely sufficient to allow all countries to reach developed world levels of usage .
The alloy of copper and nickel , called cupronickel , is used in low-denomination coins , often for the outer cladding .
The US 5-cent coin -LRB- currently called a nickel -RRB- consists of 75 % copper and 25 % nickel in homogeneous composition .
The alloy of 90 % copper and 10 % nickel , remarkable for its resistance to corrosion , is used for various objects exposed to seawater , though it is vulnerable to the sulfides sometimes found in polluted harbors and estuaries .
Alloys of copper with aluminium -LRB- about 7 % -RRB- have a pleasant golden color and are used in decorations .
Shakudō is a Japanese decorative alloy of copper containing a low percentage of gold , typically 4 -- 10 % , that can be patinated to a dark blue or black colour .
Copper -LRB- III -RRB- is most often found in oxides .
The most extensively studied copper -LRB- III -RRB- compounds are the cuprate superconductors .
Both copper -LRB- III -RRB- and even copper -LRB- IV -RRB- fluorides are known , K3CuF6 and Cs2CuF6 , respectively .
Copper has been used since ancient times as a durable , corrosion resistant , and weatherproof architectural material .
Roofs , flashings , rain gutters , downspouts , domes , spires , vaults , and doors have been made from copper for hundreds or thousands of years .
Copper 's architectural use has been expanded in modern times to include interior and exterior wall cladding , building expansion joints , radio frequency shielding , and antimicrobial and decorative indoor products such as attractive handrails , bathroom fixtures , and counter tops .
Some of copper 's other important benefits as an architectural material include low thermal movement , light weight , lightning protection , and recyclability .
Extremely clear glass , used for fiber-optic waveguides in communication networks .
Naturally occurring glass , especially the volcanic glass obsidian , has been used by many Stone Age societies across the globe for the production of sharp cutting tools and , due to its limited source areas , was extensively traded .
But in general , archaeological evidence suggests that the first true glass was made in coastal north Syria , Mesopotamia or ancient Egypt .
The earliest known glass objects , of the mid third millennium BCE , were beads , perhaps initially created as accidental by-products of metal-working -LRB- slags -RRB- or during the production of faience , a pre-glass vitreous material made by a process similar to glazing .
From the 19th century , there was a revival in many ancient glass-making techniques including cameo glass , achieved for the first time since the Roman Empire and initially mostly used for pieces in a neo-classical style .
The Art Nouveau movement made great use of glass , with René Lalique , Émile Gallé , and Daum of Nancy producing colored vases and similar pieces , often in cameo glass , and also using luster techniques .
Louis Comfort Tiffany in America specialized in stained glass , both secular and religious , and his famous lamps .
The early 20th-century saw the large-scale factory production of glass art by firms such as Waterford and Lalique .
From about 1960 onwards there have been an increasing number of small studios hand-producing glass artworks , and glass artists began to class themselves as in effect sculptors working in glass , and their works as part fine arts .
In 2004 , NIST researchers presented evidence that an isotropic non-crystalline metallic phase -LRB- dubbed `` q-glass '' -RRB- could be grown from the melt .
Transmission electron microscopy -LRB- TEM -RRB- images show that the q-glass nucleates from the melt as discrete particles , which grow spherically with a uniform growth rate in all directions .
The diffraction pattern shows it to be an isotropic glassy phase .
Yet there is a nucleation barrier , which implies an interfacial discontinuity -LRB- or internal surface -RRB- between the glass and the melt .
Having received offers of a post from the Universities of Erlangen , Berlin , and Heidelberg , Hegel chose Heidelberg , where he moved in 1816 .
Soon after , in April 1817 , his illegitimate son Ludwig Fischer -LRB- now ten years old -RRB- joined the Hegel household , having thus far spent his childhood in an orphanage .
-LRB- Ludwig 's mother had died in the meantime . -RRB-
Some have argued that either of these terms overly `` psychologize '' Hegel , implying a kind of disembodied , solipsistic consciousness like ghost or `` soul . ''
Geist combines the meaning of spirit -- as in god , ghost or mind -- with an intentional force .
In Hegel 's early philosophy of nature -LRB- draft manuscripts written during his time at the University of Jena -RRB- , Hegel 's notion of `` Geist '' was tightly bound to the notion of `` Aether '' from which Hegel also derived the concepts of space and time ; however in his later works -LRB- after Jena -RRB- Hegel did not explicitly use his old notion of `` Aether '' any more .
Some historians have spoken of Hegel 's influence as represented by two opposing camps .
The Right Hegelians , the allegedly direct disciples of Hegel at the Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität , advocated a Protestant orthodoxy and the political conservatism of the post-Napoleon Restoration period .
The Left Hegelians , also known as the Young Hegelians , interpreted Hegel in a revolutionary sense , leading to an advocation of atheism in religion and liberal democracy in politics .
Believing that the traditional description of Hegel 's philosophy in terms of thesis -- antithesis -- synthesis was mistaken , a few scholars , like Raya Dunayevskaya , have attempted to discard the triadic approach altogether .
According to their argument , although Hegel refers to `` the two elemental considerations : first , the idea of freedom as the absolute and final aim ; secondly , the means for realising it , i.e. the subjective side of knowledge and will , with its life , movement , and activity '' -LRB- thesis and antithesis -RRB- he does n't use `` synthesis '' but instead speaks of the `` Whole '' : `` We then recognised the State as the moral Whole and the Reality of Freedom , and consequently as the objective unity of these two elements . ''
Furthermore , in Hegel 's language , the `` dialectical '' aspect or `` moment '' of thought and reality , by which things or thoughts turn into their opposites or have their inner contradictions brought to the surface , what he called Aufhebung , is only preliminary to the `` speculative '' -LRB- and not `` synthesizing '' -RRB- aspect or `` moment '' , which grasps the unity of these opposites or contradiction .
The following references provide only a small selection of introductory English-language texts .
translated by Terry Pinkard -LRB- 2012 -RRB-
Many consider Augustus to be Rome 's greatest emperor ; his policies certainly extended the Empire 's life span and initiated the celebrated Pax Romana or Pax Augusta .
The Roman Senate wished subsequent emperors to `` be more fortunate than Augustus and better than Trajan '' .
Augustus was intelligent , decisive , and a shrewd politician , but he was not perhaps as charismatic as Julius Caesar , and was influenced on occasion by his third wife , Livia -LRB- sometimes for the worse -RRB- .
Nevertheless , his legacy proved more enduring .
The police force was divided into cohorts of 500 men each , while the units of firemen ranged from 500 to 1,000 men each , with 7 units assigned to 14 divided city sectors .
`` Opposites do not have to be mutually exclusive , and we are not obliged to choose one or the other .
The story of his career shows that Augustus was indeed ruthless , cruel , and ambitious for himself .
This was only in part a personal trait , for upper-class Romans were educated to compete with one another and to excel .
However , he combined an overriding concern for his personal interests with a deep-seated patriotism , based on a nostalgia of Rome 's antique virtues .
In his capacity as princeps , selfishness and selflessness coexisted in his mind .
A later senatorial investigation into the disappearance of the public funds took no action against Octavian , since he subsequently used that money to raise troops against the Senate 's arch enemy Mark Antony .
Octavian made another bold move in 44 BC when , without official permission , he appropriated the annual tribute that had been sent from Rome 's Near Eastern province to Italy .
The reign of Augustus initiated an era of relative peace known as the Pax Romana -LRB- The Roman Peace -RRB- .
The Roman world was largely free from large-scale conflict for more than two centuries , despite continuous wars of imperial expansion on the Empire 's frontiers and the year-long civil war known as the `` Year of the Four Emperors '' over the imperial succession .
Augustus dramatically enlarged the Empire , annexing Egypt , Dalmatia , Pannonia , Noricum , and Raetia ; expanding possessions in Africa ; expanding into Germania ; and completing the conquest of Hispania .
Meanwhile , Antony 's campaign turned disastrous against Parthia , tarnishing his image as a leader , and the mere 2,000 legionaries sent by Octavian to Antony were hardly enough to replenish his forces .
On the other hand , Cleopatra could restore his army to full strength ; he already was engaged in a romantic affair with her , so he decided to send Octavia back to Rome .
Octavian used this to spread propaganda implying that Antony was becoming less than Roman because he rejected a legitimate Roman spouse for an `` Oriental paramour '' .
In 36 BC , Octavian used a political ploy to make himself look less autocratic and Antony more the villain by proclaiming that the civil wars were coming to an end , and that he would step down as triumvir -- if only Antony would do the same .
Augustus died in AD 14 at the age of 75 .
In 27 BC , Octavian made a show of returning full power to the Roman Senate and relinquishing his control of the Roman provinces and their armies .
Under his consulship , however , the Senate had little power in initiating legislation by introducing bills for senatorial debate .
The careers of many clients and adherents depended on his patronage , as his financial power was unrivaled in the Roman Republic .
With the powers of a censor , Augustus appealed to virtues of Roman patriotism by banning all attire but the classic toga while entering the Forum .
There was no precedent within the Roman system for combining the powers of the tribune and the censor into a single position , nor was Augustus ever elected to the office of censor .
Julius Caesar had been granted similar powers , wherein he was charged with supervising the morals of the state .
However , this position did not extend to the censor 's ability to hold a census and determine the Senate 's roster .
The office of the tribunus plebis began to lose its prestige due to Augustus ' amassing of tribunal powers , so he revived its importance by making it a mandatory appointment for any plebeian desiring the praetorship .
Palestrina was famous in his day , and if anything his reputation increased after his death .
Conservative music of the Roman school continued to be written in his style -LRB- which in the 17th century came to be known as the prima pratica -RRB- by such students of his as Giovanni Maria Nanino , Ruggiero Giovanelli , Arcangelo Crivelli , Teofilo Gargari , Francesco Soriano and Gregorio Allegri .
It is also thought that Salvatore Sacco may have been a student of Palestrina , as well as Giovanni Dragoni , who later went on to become choirmaster in the church of S. Giovanni in Laterano .
As late as the 1750s , Palestrina 's style was still the reference for composers working in the motet form , as can be seen by Francesco Barsanti 's Sei Antifones ` in the style of Palestrina ' -LRB- c. 1750 ; published by -LSB- Peter -RSB- Welcker , c. 1762 -RRB- .
It is only recently , with the discovery and publication of a great deal of hitherto unknown or forgotten music by various Renaissance composers , that it has been possible to properly assess Palestrina in a historical context .
Though Palestrina represents late Renaissance music well , others such as Orlande de Lassus -LRB- a Franco-Flemish composer who also spent some of his early career in Italy -RRB- and William Byrd were arguably more versatile .
20th and 21st century scholarship by and large retains the view that Palestrina was a strong and refined composer whose music represents a summit of technical perfection , while emphasizing that some of his contemporaries possessed equally individual voices even within the confines of `` smooth polyphony . ''
As a result , composers like Lassus and Byrd as well as Tomas Luis de Victoria have increasingly come to enjoy comparable reputations .
In 2009 a film about the composer was produced by German television ZDF/Arte .
Title : Palestrina - Prince of Music , directed by Georg Brintrup .
One of his most important works , the Missa Papae Marcelli -LRB- Pope Marcellus Mass -RRB- , has been historically associated with erroneous information involving the Council of Trent .
According to this tale -LRB- which forms the basis of Hans Pfitzner 's opera Palestrina -RRB- , it was composed in order to persuade the Council of Trent that a draconian ban on the polyphonic treatment of text in sacred music -LRB- as opposed , that is , to a more directly intelligible homophonic treatment -RRB- was unnecessary .
However , more recent scholarship shows that this mass was in fact composed before the cardinals convened to discuss the ban -LRB- possibly as much as ten years before -RRB- .
Historical data indicates that the Council of Trent , as an official body , never actually banned any church music and failed to make any ruling or official statement on the subject .
These stories originated from the unofficial points-of-view of some Council attendees who discussed their ideas with those not privy to the Council 's deliberations .
Those opinions and rumors have , over centuries , been transmuted into fictional accounts , put into print , and often incorrectly taught as historical fact .
While Palestrina 's compositional motivations are not known , he may have been quite conscious of the need for intelligible text ; however , this was not to conform with any doctrine of the Counter-Reformation , because no such doctrine exists .
His characteristic style remained consistent from the 1560s until the end of his life .
Roche 's hypothesis that Palestrina 's seemingly dispassionate approach to expressive or emotive texts could have resulted from his having to produce many to order , or from a deliberate decision that any intensity of expression was unbecoming in church music , reflects modern expectations about expressive freedom and underestimates the extent to which the mood of Palestrina 's settings is adapted to the liturgical occasions for which the texts were set , rather than the line-by-line meaning , particularly by the use of the church modes and the disposition of voices .
Performing editions and recordings of Palestrina have tended to favour his works in the more familiar modes and standard -LRB- SATB -RRB- voicings , under-representing the expressive variety of his settings .
The Equatorie of the Planets -- A rough translation of a Latin work derived from an Arab work of the same title .
It is a description of the construction and use of a planetary equatorium , which was used in calculating planetary orbits and positions -LRB- at the time it was believed the sun orbited the Earth -RRB- .
The similar Treatise on the Astrolabe , not usually doubted as Chaucer 's work , in addition to Chaucer 's name as a gloss to the manuscript are the main pieces of evidence for the ascription to Chaucer .
However , the evidence Chaucer wrote such a work is questionable , and as such is not included in The Riverside Chaucer .
If Chaucer did not compose this work , it was probably written by a contemporary .
Verdi , the first child of Carlo Giuseppe Verdi -LRB- 1785 -- 1867 -RRB- and Luigia Uttini -LRB- 1787 -- 1851 -RRB- , was born at their home in Le Roncole , a village near Busseto , then in the Département Taro and within the borders of the First French Empire following the annexation of the Duchy of Parma and Piacenza in 1808 .
The baptismal register , prepared on 11 October 1813 , lists his parents Carlo and Luigia as `` innkeeper '' and `` spinner '' respectively .
Additionally , it lists Verdi as being `` born yesterday '' , but since days were often considered to begin at sunset , this could have meant either 9 or 10 October .
Verdi himself , following his mother , always celebrated his birthday on 9 October .
Verdi and Strepponi now decided on marriage ; they travelled to Collonges-sous-Salève , a village then part of Piedmont .
On 29 August 1859 the couple were married there , with only the coachman who had driven them there and the church bell-ringer as witnesses .
At the end of 1859 , Verdi wrote to his friend Cesare De Sanctis '' -LSB- Since completing Ballo -RSB- I have not made any more music , I have not seen any more music , I have not thought anymore about music .
He began to remodel Sant ` Agata , which took most of 1860 to complete and on which he continued to work for the next twenty years .
This included major work on a square room that became his workroom , his bedroom , and his office .
Having achieved some fame and prosperity , Verdi began in 1859 to take an active interest in Italian politics .
His early commitment to the Risorgimento movement is difficult to estimate accurately ; in the words of the music historian Philip Gossett `` myths intensifying and exaggerating -LSB- such -RSB- sentiment began circulating '' during the nineteenth century .
An example is the claim that when the `` Va , pensiero '' chorus in Nabucco was first sung in Milan , the audience , responding with nationalistic fervour , demanded an encore .
As encores were expressly forbidden by the government at the time , such a gesture would have been extremely significant .
But in fact the piece encored was not `` Va , pensiero '' but the hymn `` Immenso Jehova '' .
In 1869 , Verdi had been asked to compose a section for a requiem mass in memory of Gioachino Rossini .
He compiled and completed the requiem , but its performance was abandoned -LRB- and its premiere did not take place until 1988 -RRB- .
Five years later , Verdi reworked his `` Libera Me '' section of the Rossini Requiem and made it a part of his Requiem honouring Alessandro Manzoni , who had died in 1873 .
The complete Requiem was first performed at the cathedral in Milan on the anniversary of Manzoni 's death on 22 May 1874 .
The spinto soprano Teresa Stolz -LRB- 1834 -- 1902 -RRB- , who had sung in La Scala productions from 1865 onwards , was the soloist in the first and many later performances of the Requiem ; in February 1872 , she had created Aida in its European premiere in Milan .
She became closely associated personally with Verdi -LRB- exactly how closely remains conjectural -RRB- , to Giuseppina Verdi 's initial disquiet ; but the women were reconciled and Stolz remained a companion of Verdi after Giuseppina 's death in 1897 until his own death .
In 1844 in Germany the post-hegelian philosopher Max Stirner published the book , The Ego and Its Own , which would later be considered an influential early text of individualist anarchism .
French anarchists active in the 1848 Revolution included Anselme Bellegarrigue , Ernest Coeurderoy , Joseph Déjacque and Pierre Joseph Proudhon .
At first , the collectivists worked with the Marxists to push the First International in a more revolutionary socialist direction .
Subsequently , the International became polarised into two camps , with Marx and Bakunin as their respective figureheads .
Mikhail Bakunin characterised Marx 's ideas as centralist and predicted that , if a Marxist party came to power , its leaders would simply take the place of the ruling class they had fought against .
Anarchist historian George Woodcock reports that `` The annual Congress of the International had not taken place in 1870 owing to the outbreak of the Paris Commune , and in 1871 the General Council called only a special conference in London .
One delegate was able to attend from Spain and none from Italy , while a technical excuse -- that they had split away from the Fédération Romande -- was used to avoid inviting Bakunin 's Swiss supporters .
Thus only a tiny minority of anarchists was present , and the General Council 's resolutions passed almost unanimously .
Most of them were clearly directed against Bakunin and his followers . ''
In 1872 , the conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the Hague Congress , where Bakunin and James Guillaume were expelled from the International and its headquarters were transferred to New York .
In response , the federalist sections formed their own International at the St. Imier Congress , adopting a revolutionary anarchist programme .
Some anarchists , such as Johann Most , advocated publicising violent acts of retaliation against counter-revolutionaries because `` we preach not only action in and for itself , but also action as propaganda . ''
By the 1880s , people inside and outside the anarchist movement began to use the slogan , `` propaganda of the deed '' to refer to individual bombings , regicides , and tyrannicides .
From 1905 onwards , the Russian counterparts of these anti-syndicalist anarchist-communists become partisans of economic terrorism and illegal ` expropriations ' . ''
Illegalism as a practice emerged and within it `` The acts of the anarchist bombers and assassins -LRB- `` propaganda by the deed '' -RRB- and the anarchist burglars -LRB- `` individual reappropriation '' -RRB- expressed their desperation and their personal , violent rejection of an intolerable society .
France 's Bonnot Gang was the most famous group to embrace illegalism .
Beyond the specific factions of anarchist thought is philosophical anarchism , which embodies the theoretical stance that the state lacks moral legitimacy without accepting the imperative of revolution to eliminate it .
A component especially of individualist anarchism philosophical anarchism may accept the existence of a minimal state as unfortunate , and usually temporary , `` necessary evil '' but argue that citizens do not have a moral obligation to obey the state when its laws conflict with individual autonomy .
One reaction against sectarianism within the anarchist milieu was `` anarchism without adjectives '' , a call for toleration first adopted by Fernando Tarrida del Mármol in 1889 in response to the `` bitter debates '' of anarchist theory at the time .
Anarcho-pacifism is a tendency that rejects violence in the struggle for social change -LRB- see non-violence -RRB- .
It developed `` mostly in the Netherlands , Britain , and the United States , before and during the Second World War '' .
Christian anarchism is a movement in political theology that combines anarchism and Christianity .
Its main proponents included Leo Tolstoy , Dorothy Day , Ammon Hennacy , and Jacques Ellul .
Kings often employed bishops in administrative affairs and often determined who would be appointed to ecclesiastical offices .
In the wake of the Cluniac Reforms , this involvement was increasingly seen as inappropriate by the Papacy .
The Pope and the German princes had surfaced as major players in the political system of the empire .
The reform-minded Pope Gregory VII was determined to oppose such practices , which led to the Investiture Controversy with King Henry IV -LRB- r. 1056 -- 1106 -RRB- .
He repudiated the Pope 's interference and persuaded his bishops to excommunicate the Pope , whom he famously addressed by his born name `` Hildebrand '' , rather than his regnal name `` Pope Gregory VII '' .
The Pope , in turn , excommunicated the king , declared him deposed , and dissolved the oaths of loyalty made to Henry .
The king found himself with almost no political support and was forced to make the famous Walk to Canossa in 1077 , by which he achieved a lifting of the excommunication at the price of humiliation .
Meanwhile , the German princes had elected another king , Rudolf of Swabia .
Henry managed to defeat him but was subsequently confronted with more uprisings , renewed excommunication , and even the rebellion of his sons .
After his death , his second son , Henry V , reached an agreement with the Pope and the bishops in the 1122 Concordat of Worms .
The political power of the Empire was maintained , but the conflict had demonstrated the limits of the ruler 's power , especially in regard to the Church , and it robbed the king of the sacral status he had previously enjoyed .
Frederick 's policies were primarily directed at Italy , where he clashed with the increasingly wealthy and free-minded cities of the north , especially Milan .
He also embroiled himself in another conflict with the Papacy by supporting a candidate elected by a minority against Pope Alexander III -LRB- 1159 -- 81 -RRB- .
Frederick supported a succession of antipopes before finally making peace with Alexander in 1177 .
In Germany , the Emperor had repeatedly protected Henry the Lion against complaints by rival princes or cities -LRB- especially in the cases of Munich and Lübeck -RRB- .
Henry gave only lackluster support to Frederick 's policies , and in a critical situation during the Italian wars , Henry refused the Emperor 's plea for military support .
After returning to Germany , an embittered Frederick opened proceedings against the Duke , resulting in a public ban and the confiscation of all his territories .
In 1190 , Frederick participated in the Third Crusade and died in the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia .
At the Battle of Vienna -LRB- 1683 -RRB- , the Army of the Holy Roman Empire , led by the Polish King John III Sobieski , decisively defeated a large Turkish army , ending the western colonial Ottoman advance and leading to the eventual dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire in Europe .
The German mediatization was the series of mediatizations and secularizations that occurred between 1795 and 1814 , during the latter part of the era of the French Revolution and then the Napoleonic Era .
`` Mediatization '' was the process of annexing the lands of one imperial estate to another , often leaving the annexed some rights .
For example , the estates of the Imperial Knights were formally mediatised in 1806 , having de facto been seized by the great territorial states in 1803 in the so-called Rittersturm .
A prospective Emperor had first to be elected King of the Romans -LRB- Latin : Rex romanorum ; German : römischer König -RRB- .
German kings had been elected since the 9th century ; at that point they were chosen by the leaders of the five most important tribes -LRB- the Salian Franks of Lorraine , Ripuarian Franks of Franconia , Saxons , Bavarians and Swabians -RRB- .
In the Holy Roman Empire , the main dukes and bishops of the kingdom elected the King of the Romans .
In 1356 , Emperor Charles IV issued the Golden Bull , which limited the electors to seven : the King of Bohemia , the Count Palatine of the Rhine , the Duke of Saxony , the Margrave of Brandenburg and the archbishops of Cologne , Mainz , and Trier .
During the Thirty Years ' War , the Duke of Bavaria was given the right to vote as the eighth elector , and the Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg -LRB- colloquially , Hanover -RRB- was granted a ninth electorate ; additionally , the Napoleonic Wars resulted in several electorates being reallocated , but these new electors never voted before the Empire 's dissolution .
A candidate for election would be expected to offer concessions of land or money to the electors in order to secure their vote .
The first class , the Council of Electors , consisted of the electors , or the princes who could vote for King of the Romans .
The second class , the Council of Princes , consisted of the other princes .
The Council of Princes was divided into two `` benches , '' one for secular rulers and one for ecclesiastical ones .
Higher-ranking princes had individual votes , while lower-ranking princes were grouped into `` colleges '' by geography .
Despite appearances to the contrary , the Army of the Empire did not constitute a permanent standing army that was always at the ready to fight for the Empire .
When there was danger , an Army of the Empire was mustered from among the elements constituting it , in order to conduct an imperial military campaign or Reichsheerfahrt .
After Charlemagne died in 814 , the imperial crown was disputed among the Carolingian rulers of Western Francia and Eastern Francia , with first the western king -LRB- Charles the Bald -RRB- and then the eastern -LRB- Charles the Fat -RRB- attaining the prize .
After the death of Charles the Fat in 888 , however , the Carolingian Empire broke apart , and was never restored .
According to Regino of Prüm , the parts of the realm `` spewed forth kinglets '' , and each part elected a kinglet `` from its own bowels '' .
After the death of Charles the Fat , those crowned emperor by the pope controlled only territories in Italy .
The last such emperor was Berengar I of Italy , who died in 924 .
These receptors belong to the nuclear receptor family of ligand-activated transcription factors .
To bind their receptors , these hormones must first cross the cell membrane .
The combined hormone-receptor complex then moves across the nuclear membrane into the nucleus of the cell , where it binds to specific DNA sequences , regulating the expression of certain genes , and thereby increasing the levels of the proteins encoded by these genes .
Some are associated with the plasma membrane .
-- Small peptide hormones include TRH and vasopressin .
Peptides composed of scores or hundreds of amino acids are referred to as proteins .
Examples of protein hormones include insulin and growth hormone .
More complex protein hormones bear carbohydrate side-chains and are called glycoprotein hormones .
There are several benefits with the formation of a complex with a binding protein : the effective half-life of the bound hormone is increased ; a reservoir of bound hormones is created , which evens the variations in concentration of unbound hormones -LRB- bound hormones will replace the unbound hormones when these are eliminated -RRB- .
In addition to raising the wages of his workers , Ford also introduced a new , reduced workweek in 1926 .
The decision was made in 1922 , when Ford and Crowther described it as six 8-hour days , giving a 48-hour week , but in 1926 it was announced as five 8-hour days , giving a 40-hour week .
-LRB- Apparently the program started with Saturday being a workday and sometime later it was changed to a day off . -RRB-
On May 1 , 1926 , the Ford Motor Company 's factory workers switched to a five-day 40-hour workweek , with the company 's office workers making the transition the following August .
Wallace also found that Ford 's apology was likely , at least partly , motivated by a business that was slumping as result of his antisemitism repelling potential buyers of Ford cars .
Up until the apology , a considerable number of dealers , who had been required to make sure that buyers of Ford cars received the Independent , bought up and destroyed copies of the newspaper rather than alienate customers .
Robert Lacey wrote in Ford : The Men and the Machines that a close Willow Run associate of Ford reported that when he was shown newsreel footage of the Nazi concentration camps , he `` was confronted with the atrocities which finally and unanswerably laid bare the bestiality of the prejudice to which he contributed , he collapsed with a stroke -- his last and most serious . ''
Ford had suffered previous strokes and his final cerebral hemorrhage occurred in 1947 at age 83 .
In 1912 , Ford cooperated with Giovanni Agnelli of Fiat to launch the first Italian automotive assembly plants .
The first plants in Germany were built in the 1920s with the encouragement of Herbert Hoover and the Commerce Department , which agreed with Ford 's theory that international trade was essential to world peace .
In the 1920s , Ford also opened plants in Australia , India , and France , and by 1929 , he had successful dealerships on six continents .
Ford experimented with a commercial rubber plantation in the Amazon jungle called Fordlândia ; it was one of his few failures .
Many synagogues in the diaspora , even though Ashkenazi by rite and by ethnic composition , have adopted the `` Sephardic '' pronunciation in deference to Israeli Hebrew .
However , in many British and American schools and synagogues , this pronunciation retains several elements of its Ashkenazi substrate , especially the distinction between tsere and segol .
The Gezer calendar also dates back to the 10th century BCE at the beginning of the Monarchic Period , the traditional time of the reign of David and Solomon .
Classified as Archaic Biblical Hebrew , the calendar presents a list of seasons and related agricultural activities .
The Gezer calendar -LRB- named after the city in whose proximity it was found -RRB- is written in an old Semitic script , akin to the Phoenician one that through the Greeks and Etruscans later became the Roman script .
The Gezer calendar is written without any vowels , and it does not use consonants to imply vowels even in the places where later Hebrew spelling requires it .
In a mixed assessment , British historian Hugh Thomas opined that Guevara was a `` brave , sincere and determined man who was also obstinate , narrow , and dogmatic '' .
At the end of his life , according to Thomas , `` he seems to have become convinced of the virtues of violence for its own sake '' , while `` his influence over Castro for good or evil '' grew after his death , as Fidel took up many of his views .
Similarly , the Cuban-American sociologist Samuel Farber lauds Che Guevara as `` an honest and committed revolutionary '' , but also criticizes the fact that `` he never embraced socialism in its most democratic essence '' .
Nevertheless , Guevara remains a national hero in Cuba , where his image adorns the 3 peso banknote and school children begin each morning by pledging `` We will be like Che . ''
In his homeland of Argentina , where high schools bear his name , numerous Che museums dot the country and in 2008 a 12-foot -LRB- 3.7 m -RRB- bronze statue of him was unveiled in the city of his birth , Rosario .
Guevara has been sanctified by some Bolivian campesinos as `` Saint Ernesto '' , who pray to him for assistance .
In contrast , Guevara remains a hated figure amongst many in the Cuban exile and Cuban-American community of the United States , who view him with animosity as `` the butcher of La Cabaña '' .
Despite this polarized status , a high-contrast monochrome graphic of Che 's face , created in 1968 by Irish artist Jim Fitzpatrick , became a universally merchandized and objectified image , found on an endless array of items , including T-shirts , hats , posters , tattoos , and bikinis , ironically contributing to the consumer culture Guevara despised .
The journey took Guevara through Argentina , Chile , Peru , Ecuador , Colombia , Venezuela , Panama , and Miami , Florida , for 20 days , before returning home to Buenos Aires .
By the end of the trip , he came to view Latin America not as collection of separate nations , but as a single entity requiring a continent-wide liberation strategy .
His conception of a borderless , united Hispanic America sharing a common Latino heritage was a theme that recurred prominently during his later revolutionary activities .
On May 15 , 1954 , a shipment of Škoda infantry and light artillery weapons was dispatched from Communist Czechoslovakia for the Arbenz Government and arrived in Puerto Barrios .
As a result , the United States government -- which since 1953 had been tasked by President Eisenhower to remove Arbenz from power in the multifaceted CIA operation code named PBSUCCESS -- responded by saturating Guatemala with anti-Arbenz propaganda through radio and dropped leaflets , and began bombing raids using unmarked airplanes .
The United States also sponsored a force of several hundred Guatemalan refugees and mercenaries who were headed by Castillo Armas to help remove the Arbenz government .
Though the impact of the U.S. actions on subsequent events is debatable , by late June , Arbenz came to the conclusion that resistance against the `` giant of the north '' was futile and resigned .
This allowed Armas and his CIA-assisted forces to march into Guatemala City and establish a military junta , which would twelve days later on July 8 , elect him President .
Consequently , the Armas regime then consolidated power by rounding up hundreds of suspected communists and executed hundreds of prisoners , while crushing the previously flourishing labor unions and restoring all of United Fruits previous land holdings .
As a young medical student , Guevara traveled throughout South America and was radicalized by the poverty , hunger , and disease he witnessed .
His burgeoning desire to help overturn what he saw as the capitalist exploitation of Latin America by the United States prompted his involvement in Guatemala 's social reforms under President Jacobo Árbenz , whose eventual CIA-assisted overthrow at the behest of the United Fruit Company solidified Guevara 's political ideology .
Guevara soon rose to prominence among the insurgents , was promoted to second-in-command , and played a pivotal role in the victorious two-year guerrilla campaign that deposed the Batista regime .
In mid-January 1959 , Guevara went to live at a summer villa in Tarará to recover from a violent asthma attack .
While there he started the Tarara Group , a group that debated and formed the new plans for Cuba 's social , political , and economic development .
In addition , Che began to write his book Guerrilla Warfare while resting at Tarara .
In February , the revolutionary government proclaimed Guevara `` a Cuban citizen by birth '' in recognition of his role in the triumph .
When Hilda Gadea arrived in Cuba in late January , Guevara told her that he was involved with another woman , and the two agreed on a divorce , which was finalized on May 22 .
Guevara returned to the seaside village of Tarara in June for his honeymoon with Aleida .
Such threats were heightened when , on March 4 , 1960 , two massive explosions ripped through the French freighter La Coubre , which was carrying Belgian munitions from the port of Antwerp , and was docked in Havana Harbor .
The blasts killed at least 76 people and injured several hundred , with Guevara personally providing first aid to some of the victims .
Cuban leader Fidel Castro immediately accused the CIA of `` an act of terrorism '' and held a state funeral the following day for the victims of the blast .
It was at the memorial service that Alberto Korda took the famous photograph of Guevara , now known as Guerrillero Heroico .
At this stage , Guevara acquired the additional position of Finance Minister , as well as President of the National Bank .
These appointments , combined with his existing position as Minister of Industries , placed Guevara at the zenith of his power , as the `` virtual czar '' of the Cuban economy .
As a consequence of his position at the head of the central bank , it was now Guevara 's duty to sign the Cuban currency , which per custom would bear his signature .
It was through this symbolic act , which horrified many in the Cuban financial sector , that Guevara signaled his distaste for money and the class distinctions it brought about .
On April 17 , 1961 , 1,400 U.S.-trained Cuban exiles invaded Cuba during the Bay of Pigs Invasion .
Guevara did not play a key role in the fighting , as one day before the invasion a warship carrying Marines faked an invasion off the West Coast of Pinar del Río and drew forces commanded by Guevara to that region .
Author Tad Szulc in his explanation of the Cuban victory , assigns Guevara partial credit , stating : `` The revolutionaries won because Che Guevara , as the head of the Instruction Department of the Revolutionary Armed Forces in charge of the militia training program , had done so well in preparing 200,000 men and women for war . ''
It was also during this deployment that he suffered a bullet grazing to the cheek when his pistol fell out of its holster and accidentally discharged .
In December 1964 , Che Guevara had emerged as a `` revolutionary statesman of world stature '' and thus traveled to New York City as head of the Cuban delegation to speak at the United Nations .
On December 11 , 1964 , during Guevara 's hour-long , impassioned address at the UN , he criticized the United Nations ' inability to confront the `` brutal policy of apartheid '' in South Africa , asking `` Can the United Nations do nothing to stop this ? ''
Guevara then denounced the United States policy towards their black population , stating :
On December 17 , Guevara left New York for Paris , France , and from there embarked on a three-month world tour that included visits to the People 's Republic of China , North Korea , the United Arab Republic , Algeria , Ghana , Guinea , Mali , Dahomey , Congo-Brazzaville and Tanzania , with stops in Ireland and Prague .
While in Ireland , Guevara embraced his own Irish heritage , celebrating Saint Patrick 's Day in Limerick city .
When they found out , the television -LSB- station -RSB- came to ask me about the Lynch genealogy , but in case they were horse thieves or something like that , I did n't say much . ''
That is how it is painted by capitalist propagandists , who purport to draw a lesson from the example of Rockefeller -- whether or not it is true -- about the possibilities of success .
The amount of poverty and suffering required for the emergence of a Rockefeller , and the amount of depravity that the accumulation of a fortune of such magnitude entails , are left out of the picture , and it is not always possible to make the people in general see this .
Moreover , the coincidence of Guevara 's views with those expounded by the Chinese Communist leadership under Mao Zedong was increasingly problematic for Cuba as the nation 's economy became more and more dependent on the Soviet Union .
Since the early days of the Cuban revolution , Guevara had been considered by many an advocate of Maoist strategy in Latin America and the originator of a plan for the rapid industrialization of Cuba that was often compared to China 's `` Great Leap Forward '' .
Castro became weary of Guevara 's opposition to Soviet conditions and recommendations : measures that Castro saw as necessary , but which Guevara described as corrupt and `` pre-monopolist '' .
On October 3 , 1965 , Castro publicly revealed an undated letter purportedly written to him by Guevara around seven months earlier which was later titled Che Guevara 's `` farewell letter '' .
In the letter , Guevara reaffirmed his enduring solidarity with the Cuban Revolution but declared his intention to leave Cuba to fight for the revolutionary cause abroad .
Additionally , he resigned from all his positions in the Cuban government and communist party , and renounced his honorary Cuban citizenship .
He had expected to deal only with the Bolivian military , who were poorly trained and equipped , and was unaware that the United States government had sent a team of the CIA 's Special Activities Division commandos and other operatives into Bolivia to aid the anti-insurrection effort .
The Bolivian Army would also be trained , advised , and supplied by U.S. Army Special Forces , including a recently organized elite battalion of U.S. Rangers trained in jungle warfare that set up camp in La Esperanza , a small settlement close to the location of Guevara 's guerrillas .
Guevara was tied up and taken to a dilapidated mud schoolhouse in the nearby village of La Higuera on the evening of October 8 .
For the next half day , Guevara refused to be interrogated by Bolivian officers and would only speak quietly to Bolivian soldiers .
One of those Bolivian soldiers , a helicopter pilot named Jaime Nino de Guzman , describes Che as looking `` dreadful '' .
According to Guzman , Guevara was shot through the right calf , his hair was matted with dirt , his clothes were shredded , and his feet were covered in rough leather sheaths .
Despite his haggard appearance , he recounts that `` Che held his head high , looked everyone straight in the eyes and asked only for something to smoke . ''
De Guzman states that he `` took pity '' and gave him a small bag of tobacco for his pipe , and that Guevara then smiled and thanked him .
Later on the night of October 8 , Guevara -- despite having his hands tied -- kicked a Bolivian army officer , named Captain Espinosa , against a wall after the officer entered the schoolhouse and tried to snatch Guevara 's pipe from his mouth as a souvenir while he was still smoking it .
In another instance of defiance , Guevara spat in the face of Bolivian Rear Admiral Ugarteche , who attempted to question Guevara a few hours before his execution .
Archaeology , however , continues to support the theory that much detailed information survived in the form of formulae and stock pieces to be combined creatively by the rhapsodes of later centuries .
A number of combined archaeological and philological works have been written on the topic , such as Denys Page 's `` History and the Homeric Iliad '' and Martin P. Nilsson 's `` The Mycenaean Origin of Greek Mythology . ''
The linguist , Calvert Watkins , went so far as to seek an inherited Proto-Indo-European language origin for some epithets and the epic verse form .
The Greeks of the sixth and early fifth centuries BCE understood by the works of `` Homer '' , generally , `` the whole body of heroic tradition as embodied in hexameter verse '' .
The genre included further poems on the Trojan War , such as the Little Iliad , the Nostoi , the Cypria , and the Epigoni , as well as the Theban poems about Oedipus and his sons .
Other works , such as the corpus of Homeric Hymns , the comic mini-epic Batrachomyomachia -LRB- `` The Frog-Mouse War '' -RRB- , and the Margites , were also attributed to him .
Two other poems , the Capture of Oechalia and the Phocais were also assigned Homeric authorship .
Herodotus mentions both the Iliad and the Odyssey as works of Homer .
The passage quoted from the Iliad mentions that Paris stopped at Sidon before bringing Helen to Troy .
From the fact that the Cypria has Paris going directly to Troy from Sparta , Herodotus concludes that it was not written by Homer .
New methods also try to elucidate the question .
Combining information technologies and statistics stylometry analyzes various linguistic units : words , parts of speech , and sounds .
Based on the frequencies of Greek letters , a first study of Dietmar Najock particularly shows the internal cohesion of the Iliad and the Odyssey .
Taking into account the repartition of the letters , a recent study of Stephan Vonfelt highlights the unity of the works of Homer compared to Hesiod .
The thesis of modern analysts being questioned , the debate remains open .
The koine in turn had come from the first librarian at Alexandria , Zenodotus , who flourished at the beginning of the 3rd century BCE .
He also was attempting to restore authenticity to manuscripts he found in a state of chaos .
He set the precedent by marking passages he considered spurious , and by filling in material that seemed to be missing himself .
Neither Zenodotus nor Aristarchus mentioned any authentic master copy from which to make corrections .
The current division into 24 books each for the Iliad and Odyssey came from Zenodotus .
Horses , particularly colts , sometimes are physically capable of reproduction at about 18 months , but domesticated horses are rarely allowed to breed before the age of three , especially females .
Horses four years old are considered mature , although the skeleton normally continues to develop until the age of six ; maturation also depends on the horse 's size , breed , sex , and quality of care .
Larger horses have larger bones ; therefore , not only do the bones take longer to form bone tissue , but the epiphyseal plates are larger and take longer to convert from cartilage to bone .
These plates convert after the other parts of the bones , and are crucial to development .
The horses ' senses are based on their status as prey animals , where they must be aware of their surroundings at all times .
They have the largest eyes of any land mammal , and are lateral-eyed , meaning that their eyes are positioned on the sides of their heads .
This means that horses have a range of vision of more than 350 ° , with approximately 65 ° of this being binocular vision and the remaining 285 ° monocular vision .
Horses have excellent day and night vision , but they have two-color , or dichromatic vision ; their color vision is somewhat like red-green color blindness in humans , where certain colors , especially red and related colors , appear as a shade of green .
`` Warmblood '' breeds , such as the Trakehner or Hanoverian , developed when European carriage and war horses were crossed with Arabians or Thoroughbreds , producing a riding horse with more refinement than a draft horse , but greater size and milder temperament than a lighter breed .
Certain pony breeds with warmblood characteristics have been developed for smaller riders .
Warmbloods are considered a `` light horse '' or `` riding horse '' .
Communication between human and horse is paramount in any equestrian activity ; to aid this process horses are usually ridden with a saddle on their backs to assist the rider with balance and positioning , and a bridle or related headgear to assist the rider in maintaining control .
Sometimes horses are ridden without a saddle , and occasionally , horses are trained to perform without a bridle or other headgear .
Many horses are also driven , which requires a harness , bridle , and some type of vehicle .
Historically , equestrians honed their skills through games and races .
Equestrian sports provided entertainment for crowds and honed the excellent horsemanship that was needed in battle .
Many sports , such as dressage , eventing and show jumping , have origins in military training , which were focused on control and balance of both horse and rider .
Other sports , such as rodeo , developed from practical skills such as those needed on working ranches and stations .
Sport hunting from horseback evolved from earlier practical hunting techniques .
Horse racing of all types evolved from impromptu competitions between riders or drivers .
All forms of competition , requiring demanding and specialized skills from both horse and rider , resulted in the systematic development of specialized breeds and equipment for each sport .
The popularity of equestrian sports through the centuries has resulted in the preservation of skills that would otherwise have disappeared after horses stopped being used in combat .
There are certain jobs that horses do very well , and no technology has yet developed to fully replace them .
Cattle ranches still require riders on horseback to round up cattle that are scattered across remote , rugged terrain .
Search and rescue organizations in some countries depend upon mounted teams to locate people , particularly hikers and children , and to provide disaster relief assistance .
Horses can also be used in areas where it is necessary to avoid vehicular disruption to delicate soil , such as nature reserves .
They may also be the only form of transport allowed in wilderness areas .
Law enforcement officers such as park rangers or game wardens may use horses for patrols , and horses or mules may also be used for clearing trails or other work in areas of rough terrain where vehicles are less effective .
The first design for an American car with a gasoline internal combustion engine was made in 1877 by George Selden of Rochester , New York .
Selden applied for a patent for a car in 1879 , but the patent application expired because the vehicle was never built .
After a delay of sixteen years and a series of attachments to his application , on 5 November 1895 , Selden was granted a United States patent -LRB- U.S. Patent 549,160 -RRB- for a two-stroke car engine , which hindered , more than encouraged , development of cars in the United States .
His patent was challenged by Henry Ford and others , and overturned in 1911 .
From the time of Ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle to the 19th century , `` natural philosophy '' encompassed astronomy , medicine and physics .
For example , Newton 's 1687 Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy later became classified as a book of physics .
In the 19th century , the growth of modern research universities led academic philosophy and other disciplines to professionalize and specialize .
In the modern era , some investigations that were traditionally part of philosophy became separate academic disciplines , including psychology , sociology , linguistics and economics .
Among some of the Native Americans in the United States there is a belief in a metaphysical principle called the `` Great Mystery '' -LRB- Siouan : Wakan Tanka , Algonquian : Gitche Manitou -RRB- .
According to Peter M. Whiteley , for the Native Americans , `` Mind is critically informed by transcendental experience -LRB- dreams , visions and so on -RRB- as well as by reason . ''
The practices to access these transcendental experiences are termed Shamanism .
Rules of inference are used to infer conclusions such as , modus ponens , where given `` A '' and `` If A then B '' , then `` B '' must be concluded .
Ayn Rand is the foremost example of an intellectual working contemporaneously with contemporary philosophy but whose contributions were not made within the professional discipline of `` philosophy '' : `` For all her -LSB- Ayn Rand 's -RSB- popularity , however , only a few professional philosophers have taken her work seriously .
As a result , most of the serious philosophical work on Rand has appeared in non-academic , non-peer-reviewed journals , or in books , and the bibliography reflects this fact . ''
In the early 1990s , the Canadian Philosophical Association noted a gender imbalance and gender bias in the academic field of philosophy .
In June 2013 , a US sociology professor stated that `` out of all recent citations in four prestigious philosophy journals , female authors comprise just 3.6 percent of the total . ''
Susan Price argues that the philosophical '' ... canon remains dominated by white males -- the discipline that ... still hews to the myth that genius is tied to gender . ''
Many philosophical debates that began in ancient times are still debated today .
Colin McGinn and others claim that no philosophical progress has occurred during that interval .
Chalmers and others , by contrast , see progress in philosophy similar to that in science , while Talbot Brewer argued that `` progress '' is the wrong standard by which to judge philosophical activity .
Western philosophy is the philosophical tradition of the Western world and dates to Pre-Socratic thinkers who were active in Ancient Greece in the 6th century BC such as Thales -LRB- c. 624 -- c. 546 BC -RRB- and Pythagoras -LRB- c. 570 -- c. 495 BC -RRB- who practiced a `` love of wisdom '' -LRB- philosophia -RRB- and were also termed physiologoi -LRB- students of physis , or nature -RRB- .
Socrates was a very influential philosopher , who insisted that he possessed no wisdom but was a pursuer of wisdom .
Western philosophy can be divided into three eras : Ancient -LRB- Greco-Roman -RRB- , Medieval philosophy -LRB- Christian European -RRB- , and Modern philosophy .
The Ancient era was dominated by Greek philosophical schools which arose out of the various pupils of Socrates , such as Plato who founded the Platonic Academy , and was one of the most influential Greek thinkers for the whole of Western thought .
Plato 's student Aristotle was also extremely influential , founding the Peripatetic school .
Other traditions include Cynicism , Stoicism , Greek Skepticism and Epicureanism .
Important topics covered by the Greeks included metaphysics -LRB- with competing theories such as atomism and monism -RRB- , cosmology , the nature of the well-lived life -LRB- eudaimonia -RRB- , the possibility of knowledge and the nature of reason -LRB- logos -RRB- .
With the rise of the Roman empire , Greek philosophy was also increasingly discussed in Latin by Romans such as Cicero and Seneca .
The worst type of errors are those that go unnoticed , and are not even detected by the disk firmware or the host operating system .
These errors are known as silent data corruption , some of which may be caused by hard disk drive malfunctions .
Some desktop and laptop computer systems allow the user to make a tradeoff between seek performance and drive noise .
Faster seek rates typically require more energy usage to quickly move the heads across the platter , causing louder noises from the pivot bearing and greater device vibrations as the heads are rapidly accelerated during the start of the seek motion and decelerated at the end of the seek motion .
Quiet operation reduces movement speed and acceleration rates , but at a cost of reduced seek performance .
This rate depends on the track location ; the rate is higher for data on the outer tracks -LRB- where there are more data sectors per rotation -RRB- and lower toward the inner tracks -LRB- where there are fewer data sectors per rotation -RRB- ; and is generally somewhat higher for 10,000-rpm drives .
A current widely used standard for the `` buffer-to-computer '' interface is 3.0 Gbit/s SATA , which can send about 300 megabyte/s -LRB- 10-bit encoding -RRB- from the buffer to the computer , and thus is still comfortably ahead of today 's disk-to-buffer transfer rates .
Data transfer rate -LRB- read/write -RRB- can be measured by writing a large file to disk using special file generator tools , then reading back the file .
Transfer rate can be influenced by file system fragmentation and the layout of the files .
The Federal Reserve Board has a quality-adjusted price index for large-scale enterprise storage systems including three or more enterprise HDDs and associated controllers , racks and cables .
Prices for these large-scale storage systems improved at the rate of 30 % per year during 2004 -- 2009 and 22 % per year during 2009 -- 2014 .
EIDE was an unofficial update -LRB- by Western Digital -RRB- to the original IDE standard , with the key improvement being the use of direct memory access -LRB- DMA -RRB- to transfer data between the disk and the computer without the involvement of the CPU , an improvement later adopted by the official ATA standards .
By directly transferring data between memory and disk , DMA eliminates the need for the CPU to copy byte per byte , therefore allowing it to process other tasks while the data transfer occurs .
The former are configured to provide a guaranteed streaming capacity , even in the face of read and write errors , while the latter are built to resist larger amounts of shock .
In October 1519 , Cortés and his men , accompanied by about 1,000 Tlaxcalteca , marched to Cholula , the second largest city in central Mexico .
Cortés , either in a pre-meditated effort to instill fear upon the Aztecs waiting for him at Tenochtitlan or -LRB- as he later claimed , when he was being investigated -RRB- wishing to make an example when he feared native treachery , massacred thousands of unarmed members of the nobility gathered at the central plaza , then partially burned the city .
Early lionizing of the conquistadors did not encourage deep examination of Cortés .
Later reconsideration of the conquistadors ' character in the context of modern anti-colonial sentiment also did little to expand understanding of Cortés as an individual .
As a result of these historical trends , descriptions of Cortés tend to be simplistic , and either damning or idealizing .
In 1528 , Cortés returned to Spain to appeal to the justice of his master , Charles V. Juan Altamirano and Alonso Valiente stayed in Mexico and acted as Cortés ' representatives during his absence .
By this time Charles had returned and Cortés forthrightly responded to his enemy 's charges .
Denying he had held back on gold due the crown , he showed that he had contributed more than the quinto -LRB- one-fifth -RRB- required .
Indeed , he had spent lavishly to build the new capital of Mexico City on the ruins of the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlán , leveled during the siege that brought down the Aztec empire .
After reasserting his position and reestablishing some sort of order , Cortés retired to his estates at Cuernavaca , about 30 miles -LRB- 48 km -RRB- south of Mexico City .
Remaining in Mexico between 1530 and 1541 , Cortés quarreled with Nuño Beltrán de Guzmán and disputed the right to explore the territory that is today California with Antonio de Mendoza , the first viceroy .
In 1536 , Cortés explored the northwestern part of Mexico and discovered the Baja California Peninsula .
Cortés also spent time exploring the Pacific coast of Mexico .
The Gulf of California was originally named the Sea of Cortes by its discoverer Francisco de Ulloa in 1539 .
When a neutral base forms a bond with a neutral acid , a condition of electric stress occurs .
The acid and the base share the electron pair that formerly only belonged to the base .
As a result , a high dipole moment is created , which can only be destroyed by rearranging the molecules .
It is not a simple algebraic equation , but in general a linear partial differential equation , describing the time-evolution of the system 's wave function -LRB- also called a `` state function '' -RRB- .
To determine the rate equation for a particular system one combines the reaction rate with a mass balance for the system .
Abram and Sarai tried to make sense of how he would become a progenitor of nations since after 10 years of living in Canaan , no child had been born .
Sarai then offered her Egyptian handmaiden , Hagar , for Abram to consort with so that he may have a child by her , as his wife .
After Hagar found she was pregnant , she began to despise her mistress , Sarai .
Therefore , Sarai mistreated Hagar , and Hagar fled away .
En route an angel spoke with Hagar at the fountain in the way to Shur .
Hagar then called God who spoke to her `` El-roi '' , -LRB- `` Thou God seest me : '' KJV -RRB- .
From that day , the well was called Beer-lahai-roi , -LRB- `` The well of him that liveth and seeth me . ''
One of the visitors told Abraham that upon his return next year , Sarah would have a son .
While at the tent entrance , Sarah overheard what was said and she laughed to herself about the prospect of having a child at their ages .
The visitor inquired of Abraham why Sarah laughed at bearing a child at her age , as nothing is too hard for God .
Frightened , Sarah denied laughing .
The Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus depicts a set of biblical stories , including Abraham about to sacrifice Isaac .
These sculpted scenes are on the outside of a marble Early Christian sarcophagus used for the burial of Junius Bassus .
This sarcophagus has been described as `` probably the single most famous piece of early Christian relief sculpture . ''
The sarcophagus was originally placed in or under Old St. Peter 's Basilica , was rediscovered in 1597 , and is now below the modern basilica in the Museo Storico del Tesoro della Basilica di San Pietro -LRB- Museum of Saint Peter 's Basilica -RRB- in the Vatican .
The Old Testament scenes depicted were chosen as precursors of Christ 's sacrifice in the New Testament , in an early form of typology .
Haran begat Lot -LRB- who was thus Abram 's nephew -RRB- , and died in his native city , Ur of the Chaldees .
Abram married Sarah -LRB- Sarai -RRB- , who was barren .
Terah , with Abram , Sarai , and Lot , then departed for Canaan , but settled in a place named Haran , where Terah died at the age of 205 .
-LRB- Genesis 11:27 -- 32 -RRB- God had told Abram to leave his country and kindred and go to a land that he would show him , and promised to make of him a great nation , bless him , make his name great , bless them that bless him , and curse he who may curse him .
-LRB- Genesis 12:1 -- 3 -RRB- Abram was 75 years old when he left Haran with his wife Sarai , his nephew Lot , and the substance and souls that they had acquired , and traveled to Shechem in Canaan .
Japanese uses orthographic cues to delimit words such as switching between kanji -LRB- Chinese characters -RRB- and the two kana syllabaries .
This is a fairly soft rule , because content words can also be written in hiragana for effect -LRB- though if done extensively spaces are typically added to maintain legibility -RRB- .
This was a significantly less well paid role than she had been accustomed to .
The bawdy role revived her career and `` See What the Boys in the Back Room Will Have '' , a song she introduced in the film , became a hit when she recorded it for Decca .
Francis Wyndham offered a more critical appraisal of the phenomenon of Dietrich in concert .
He wrote in 1964 : `` What she does is neither difficult nor diverting , but the fact that she does it at all fills the onlookers with wonder ... It takes two to make a conjuring trick : the illusionist 's sleight of hand and the stooge 's desire to be deceived .
To these necessary elements -LRB- her own technical competence and her audience 's sentimentality -RRB- Marlene Dietrich adds a third -- the mysterious force of her belief in her own magic .
Those who find themselves unable to share this belief tend to blame themselves rather than her . ''
Italy has a very broad and diverse architectural style , which can not be simply classified by period , but also by region , because of Italy 's division into several regional states until 1861 .
This has created a highly diverse and eclectic range in architectural designs .
The Italian Renaissance is said by many to be the golden age of painting ; roughly spanning the 14th through the mid-17th centuries with a significant influence also out of the borders of modern Italy .
In Italy artists like Paolo Uccello , Fra Angelico , Masaccio , Piero della Francesca , Andrea Mantegna , Filippo Lippi , Giorgione , Tintoretto , Sandro Botticelli , Leonardo da Vinci , Michelangelo Buonarroti , Raphael , Giovanni Bellini , and Titian took painting to a higher level through the use of perspective , the study of human anatomy and proportion , and through their development of an unprecedented refinement in drawing and painting techniques .
Michelangelo was an active sculptor from about 1500 to 1520 , and his great masterpieces including his David , Pietà , Moses .
Other prominent Renaissance sculptors include Lorenzo Ghiberti , Luca Della Robbia , Donatello , Filippo Brunelleschi , Andrea del Verrocchio .
As the country grew wealthier in the 1950s , a form of neorealism known as pink neorealism succeeded , and other film genres , such as sword-and-sandal followed as spaghetti westerns , were popular in the 1960s and 1970s .
Actresses such as Sophia Loren , Giulietta Masina and Gina Lollobrigida achieved international stardom during this period .
Erotic Italian thrillers , or giallos , produced by directors such as Mario Bava and Dario Argento in the 1970s , also influenced the horror genre worldwide .
In recent years , the Italian scene has received only occasional international attention , with movies like Life Is Beautiful directed by Roberto Benigni , Il Postino : The Postman with Massimo Troisi and The Great Beauty directed by Paolo Sorrentino .
Italy 's national football team -LRB- nicknamed Gli Azzurri -- `` the Blues '' -RRB- is one of the world 's most successful team as it has won four FIFA World Cups -LRB- 1934 , 1938 , 1982 , and 2006 -RRB- .
Italian clubs have won 48 major European trophies , making Italy the second most successful country in European football .
Italy 's top-flight club football league , Serie A , ranks as the fourth best in Europe and is followed by millions of fans around the world .
The birth of the Kingdom of Italy was the result of efforts by Italian nationalists and monarchists loyal to the House of Savoy to establish a united kingdom encompassing the entire Italian Peninsula .
In the context of the 1848 liberal revolutions that swept through Europe , an unsuccessful war was declared on Austria .
The Kingdom of Sardinia again attacked the Austrian Empire in the Second Italian War of Independence of 1859 , with the aid of France , resulting in liberating Lombardy .
The Constitutional Law of the Kingdom of Sardinia the Albertine Statute of 1848 , was extended to the whole Kingdom of Italy in 1861 , and provided for basic freedoms of the new State , but electoral laws excluded the non-propertied and uneducated classes from voting .
The government of the new kingdom took place in a framework of parliamentary constitutional monarchy dominated by liberal forces .
In 1913 , male universal suffrage was adopted .
As Northern Italy quickly industrialised , the South and rural areas of North remained underdeveloped and overpopulated , forcing millions of people to migrate abroad , while the Italian Socialist Party constantly increased in strength , challenging the traditional liberal and conservative establishment .
Starting from the last two decades of the 19th century , Italy developed into a colonial power by forcing Somalia , Eritrea and later Libya and the Dodecanese under its rule .
Many watercourses and coastal stretches have also been contaminated by industrial and agricultural activity , while because of rising water levels , Venice has been regularly flooded throughout recent years .
Waste from industrial activity is not always disposed of by legal means and has led to permanent health effects on inhabitants of affected areas , as in the case of the Seveso disaster .
The country has also operated several nuclear reactors between 1963 and 1990 but , after the Chernobyl disaster and a referendum on the issue the nuclear programme was terminated , a decision that was overturned by the government in 2008 , planning to build up to four nuclear power plants with French technology .
This was in turn struck down by a referendum following the Fukushima nuclear accident .
Italy has been a unitary parliamentary republic since 2 June 1946 , when the monarchy was abolished by a constitutional referendum .
The President is elected for a single seven years mandate by the Parliament of Italy in joint session .
Italy has a written democratic constitution , resulting from the work of a Constituent Assembly formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the Civil War .
Their duties include enforcing poaching laws , safeguarding protected animal species and preventing forest fires .
Italy 's closest trade ties are with the other countries of the European Union , with whom it conducts about 59 % of its total trade .
Finally , tourism is one of the fastest growing and profitable sectors of the national economy : with 48.6 million international tourist arrivals and total receipts estimated at $ 45.5 billion in 2014 , Italy was the fifth most visited country and the sixth highest tourism earner in the world .
According to the last national agricultural census , there were 1.6 million farms in 2010 -LRB- − 32.4 % since 2000 -RRB- covering 12.7 million hectares -LRB- 63 % of which are located in Southern Italy -RRB- .
Of the total surface area in agricultural use -LRB- forestry excluded -RRB- , grain fields take up 31 % , olive tree orchards 8.2 % , vineyards 5.4 % , citrus orchards 3.8 % , sugar beets 1.7 % , and horticulture 2.4 % .
The remainder is primarily dedicated to pastures -LRB- 25.9 % -RRB- and feed grains -LRB- 11.6 % -RRB- .
In 2004 the transport sector in Italy generated a turnover of about 119.4 billion euros , employing 935,700 persons in 153,700 enterprises .
Regarding the national road network , in 2002 there were 668,721 km -LRB- 415,524 mi -RRB- of serviceable roads in Italy , including 6,487 km -LRB- 4,031 mi -RRB- of motorways , state-owned but privately operated by Atlantia .
In 2005 , about 34,667,000 passenger cars -LRB- 590 cars per 1,000 people -RRB- and 4,015,000 goods vehicles circulated on the national road network .
In 2004 there were approximately 30 main airports -LRB- including the two hubs of Malpensa International in Milan and Leonardo da Vinci International in Rome -RRB- and 43 major seaports -LRB- including the seaport of Genoa , the country 's largest and second largest in the Mediterranean Sea -RRB- .
In 2005 Italy maintained a civilian air fleet of about 389,000 units and a merchant fleet of 581 ships .
The Italian state , as a measure to protect religious freedom , devolves shares of income tax to recognised religious communities , under a regime known as Eight per thousand -LRB- Otto per mille -RRB- .
Donations are allowed to Christian , Jewish , Buddhist and Hindu communities ; however , Islam remains excluded , since no Muslim communities have yet signed a concordat with the Italian state .
Taxpayers who do not wish to fund a religion contribute their share to the state welfare system .
The Web has also enabled individuals and organizations to publish ideas and information to a potentially large audience online at greatly reduced expense and time delay .
Publishing a web page , a blog , or building a website involves little initial cost and many cost-free services are available .
Many individuals and some companies and groups use web logs or blogs , which are largely used as easily updatable online diaries .
Some commercial organizations encourage staff to communicate advice in their areas of specialization in the hope that visitors will be impressed by the expert knowledge and free information , and be attracted to the corporation as a result .
Streaming media is the real-time delivery of digital media for the immediate consumption or enjoyment by end users .
Many radio and television broadcasters provide Internet feeds of their live audio and video productions .
These providers have been joined by a range of pure Internet `` broadcasters '' who never had on-air licenses .
This means that an Internet-connected device , such as a computer or something more specific , can be used to access on-line media in much the same way as was previously possible only with a television or radio receiver .
Podcasting is a variation on this theme , where -- usually audio -- material is downloaded and played back on a computer or shifted to a portable media player to be listened to on the move .
These techniques using simple equipment allow anybody , with little censorship or licensing control , to broadcast audio-visual material worldwide .
Internet usage has seen tremendous growth .
From 2000 to 2009 , the number of Internet users globally rose from 394 million to 1.858 billion .
By 2010 , 22 percent of the world 's population had access to computers with 1 billion Google searches every day , 300 million Internet users reading blogs , and 2 billion videos viewed daily on YouTube .
In 2014 the world 's Internet users surpassed 3 billion or 43.6 percent of world population , but two-thirds of the users came from richest countries , with 78.0 percent of Europe countries population using the Internet , followed by 57.4 percent of the Americas .
Examples range from CBeebies , through school and high-school revision guides and virtual universities , to access to top-end scholarly literature through the likes of Google Scholar .
Further , the Internet allows universities , in particular , researchers from the social and behavioral sciences , to conduct research remotely via virtual laboratories , with profound changes in reach and generalizability of findings as well as in communication between scientists and in the publication of results .
The Tale of Genji -LRB- 源氏物語 , Genji monogatari -RRB- is a classic work of Japanese literature written by the noblewoman and lady-in-waiting Murasaki Shikibu in the early years of the 11th century in `` concertina '' or `` orihon '' style made of several sheets of paper pasted together and folded alternately in one direction then the other -LRB- Lyons , 2011 -RRB- , around the peak of the Heian period .
It is sometimes called the world 's first novel , the first modern novel , the first psychological novel or the first novel still to be considered a classic .
Notably , the work also illustrates a unique depiction of the lifestyles of high courtiers during the Heian period .
This question is more difficult because we do not know exactly when the chapters acquired their titles .
The Bank of Japan issued the 2000 Yen banknote in her honor , featuring a scene from the novel based on the 12th century illustrated handscroll .
Genji 's mother dies when he is three years old , and the Emperor can not forget her .
The Emperor Kiritsubo then hears of a woman -LRB- Lady Fujitsubo -RRB- , formerly a princess of the preceding emperor , who resembles his deceased concubine , and later she becomes one of his wives .
Genji loves her first as a stepmother , but later as a woman , and they fall in love with each other .
Genji is frustrated by his forbidden love for the Lady Fujitsubo and is on bad terms with his wife -LRB- Aoi no Ue -RRB- .
He engages in a series of unfulfilling love affairs with other women , but in most cases his advances are rebuffed , his lover dies suddenly during the affair , or he becomes bored with his lover .
Following the Industrial Revolution , possibly a third of the world 's economic output are derived that is from manufacturing industries .
Many developed countries and many developing/semi-developed countries -LRB- People 's Republic of China , India etc. -RRB- depend significantly on manufacturing industry .
Industries , the countries they reside in , and the economies of those countries are interlinked in a complex web of interdependence .
In the late 2000s the ocean evolved into a hub of pirate activity .
By 2013 , attacks off the Horn region 's coast had steadily declined due to active private security and international navy patrols , especially by the Indian Navy .
Transition metal compounds show a rich coordination chemistry , varying from tetrahedral for titanium -LRB- e.g. , TiCl4 -RRB- to square planar for some nickel complexes to octahedral for coordination complexes of cobalt .
Usually , organometallic compounds are considered to contain the M-C-H group .
Operationally , the definition of an organometallic compound is more relaxed to include also highly lipophilic complexes such as metal carbonyls and even metal alkoxides .
This important area focuses on structure , bonding , and the physical properties of materials .
In practice , solid state inorganic chemistry uses techniques such as crystallography to gain an understanding of the properties that result from collective interactions between the subunits of the solid .
Included in solid state chemistry are metals and their alloys or intermetallic derivatives .
Elements heavier than C , N , O , and F often form compounds with more electrons than predicted by the octet rule , as explained in the article on hypervalent molecules .
The mechanisms of their reactions differ from organic compounds for this reason .
Elements lighter than carbon -LRB- B , Be , Li -RRB- as well as Al and Mg often form electron-deficient structures that are electronically akin to carbocations .
Such electron-deficient species tend to react via associative pathways .
The chemistry of the lanthanides mirrors many aspects of chemistry seen for aluminium .
These fields are active areas of research in inorganic chemistry , aimed toward new catalysts , superconductors , and therapies .
Young and Fresnel combined Newton 's particle theory with Huygens ' wave theory to show that colour is the visible manifestation of light 's wavelength .
The German poet and scientist , Goethe , could not shake the Newtonian foundation but `` one hole Goethe did find in Newton 's armour , ... Newton had committed himself to the doctrine that refraction without colour was impossible .
He therefore thought that the object-glasses of telescopes must for ever remain imperfect , achromatism and refraction being incompatible .
This inference was proved by Dollond to be wrong . ''
Newton 's postulate of an invisible force able to act over vast distances led to him being criticised for introducing `` occult agencies '' into science .
Later , in the second edition of the Principia -LRB- 1713 -RRB- , Newton firmly rejected such criticisms in a concluding General Scholium , writing that it was enough that the phenomena implied a gravitational attraction , as they did ; but they did not so far indicate its cause , and it was both unnecessary and improper to frame hypotheses of things that were not implied by the phenomena .
-LRB- Here Newton used what became his famous expression `` hypotheses non-fingo '' -RRB- .
With the Principia , Newton became internationally recognised .
He acquired a circle of admirers , including the Swiss-born mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier .
In September of that year , Newton had a breakdown which included sending wild accusatory letters to his friends Samuel Pepys and John Locke .
His note to the latter included the charge that Locke `` endeavoured to embroil me with woemen '' .
The monument features a figure of Newton reclining on top of a sarcophagus , his right elbow resting on several of his great books and his left hand pointing to a scroll with a mathematical design .
Above him is a pyramid and a celestial globe showing the signs of the Zodiac and the path of the comet of 1680 .
A relief panel depicts putti using instruments such as a telescope and prism .
The Latin inscription on the base translates as :
Here is buried Isaac Newton , Knight , who by a strength of mind almost divine , and mathematical principles peculiarly his own , explored the course and figures of the planets , the paths of comets , the tides of the sea , the dissimilarities in rays of light , and , what no other scholar has previously imagined , the properties of the colours thus produced .
Mortals rejoice that there has existed such and so great an ornament of the human race !
A statue of Isaac Newton , looking at an apple at his feet , can be seen at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History .
A large bronze statue , Newton , after William Blake , by Eduardo Paolozzi , dated 1995 and inspired by Blake 's etching , dominates the piazza of the British Library in London .
By 1672 he had started to record his theological researches in notebooks which he showed to no one and which have only recently been examined .
They demonstrate an extensive knowledge of early church writings and show that in the conflict between Athanasius and Arius which defined the Creed , he took the side of Arius , the loser , who rejected the conventional view of the Trinity .
Newton `` recognized Christ as a divine mediator between God and man , who was subordinate to the Father who created him . ''
In 1888 , after spending sixteen years cataloging Newton 's papers , Cambridge University kept a small number and returned the rest to the Earl of Portsmouth .
In 1936 , a descendant offered the papers for sale at Sotheby 's .
The collection was broken up and sold for a total of about # 9,000 .
John Maynard Keynes was one of about three dozen bidders who obtained part of the collection at auction .
Keynes went on to reassemble an estimated half of Newton 's collection of papers on alchemy before donating his collection to Cambridge University in 1946 .
It is known from his notebooks that Newton was grappling in the late 1660s with the idea that terrestrial gravity extends , in an inverse-square proportion , to the Moon ; however it took him two decades to develop the full-fledged theory .
The question was not whether gravity existed , but whether it extended so far from Earth that it could also be the force holding the Moon to its orbit .
Newton showed that if the force decreased as the inverse square of the distance , one could indeed calculate the Moon 's orbital period , and get good agreement .
Page numbers citing this work are Beck 's marginal numbers that refer to the page numbers of the standard edition of Königlich-Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften .
All the preparations of reason , therefore , in what may be called pure philosophy , are in reality directed to those three problems only -LSB- God , the soul , and freedom -RSB- .
However , these three elements in themselves still hold independent , proportional , objective weight individually .
As this concerns our actions with reference to the highest aims of life , we see that the ultimate intention of nature in her wise provision was really , in the constitution of our reason , directed to moral interests only .
Kant believed that all the possible propositions within Aristotle 's syllogistic logic are equivalent to all possible judgments , and that all the logical operators within the propositions are equivalent to the moments of the understanding within judgments .
An agent 's maxim , according to Kant , is his `` subjective principle of human actions '' : that is , what the agent believes is his reason to act .
Kant articulates his strongest criticisms of the organization and practices of religious organizations to those that encourage what he sees as a religion of counterfeit service to God .
The severity of Kant 's criticisms on these matters , along with his rejection of the possibility of theoretical proofs for the existence of God and his philosophical re-interpretation of some basic Christian doctrines , allow interpretations that see Kant as thoroughly hostile to religion in general and Christianity in particular -LRB- e.g. , Walsh 1967 -RRB- .
Nevertheless , other interpreters consider that Kant was trying to mark off a defensible rational core of Christian belief .
Kant sees in Jesus Christ the affirmation of a `` pure moral disposition of the heart '' that `` can make man well-pleasing to God '' .
Kant 's contribution to aesthetic theory is developed in the Critique of Judgment -LRB- 1790 -RRB- where he investigates the possibility and logical status of `` judgments of taste . ''
In the `` Critique of Aesthetic Judgment , '' the first major division of the Critique of Judgment , Kant used the term `` aesthetic '' in a manner that , according to Kant scholar W.H. Walsh , differs from its modern sense .
Prior to this , in the Critique of Pure Reason , to note essential differences between judgments of taste , moral judgments , and scientific judgments , Kant abandoned the term `` aesthetic '' as `` designating the critique of taste , '' noting that judgments of taste could never be `` directed '' by `` laws a priori '' .
After A. G. Baumgarten , who wrote Aesthetica -LRB- 1750 -- 58 -RRB- , Kant was one of the first philosophers to develop and integrate aesthetic theory into a unified and comprehensive philosophical system , utilizing ideas that played an integral role throughout his philosophy .
He opposed `` democracy , '' which at his time meant direct democracy , believing that majority rule posed a threat to individual liberty .
He stated , '' ... democracy is , properly speaking , necessarily a despotism , because it establishes an executive power in which ` all ' decide for or even against one who does not agree ; that is , ` all , ' who are not quite all , decide , and this is a contradiction of the general will with itself and with freedom . ''
Ferropericlase -LRB- Mg , Fe -RRB- O , a solid solution of periclase -LRB- MgO -RRB- and wüstite -LRB- FeO -RRB- , makes up about 20 % of the volume of the lower mantle of the Earth , which makes it the second most abundant mineral phase in that region after silicate perovskite -LRB- Mg , Fe -RRB- SiO3 ; it also is the major host for iron in the lower mantle .
At the bottom of the transition zone of the mantle , the reaction γ - -LRB- Mg , Fe -RRB- 2 -LSB- SiO4 -RSB- ↔ -LRB- Mg , Fe -RRB- -LSB- SiO3 -RSB- + -LRB- Mg , Fe -RRB- O transforms γ-olivine into a mixture of perovskite and ferropericlase and vice versa .
In the literature , this mineral phase of the lower mantle is also often called magnesiowüstite .
Silicate perovskite may form up to 93 % of the lower mantle , and the magnesium iron form , -LRB- Mg , Fe -RRB- SiO3 , is considered to be the most abundant mineral in the Earth , making up 38 % of its volume .
Large deposits of iron are found in banded iron formations .
These geological formations are a type of rock consisting of repeated thin layers of iron oxides alternating with bands of iron-poor shale and chert .
The banded iron formations were laid down in the time between 3,700 million years ago and 1,800 million years ago .
The word ferrum itself possibly comes from the Semitic languages , via Etruscan , from a root that also gave rise to Old English bræs `` brass '' .
The English word iron derives ultimately from Proto-Germanic * isarnan , which is also the source of the German name Eisen .
It was most likely borrowed from Celtic * isarnon , which ultimately comes from Proto-Indo-European * is - -LRB- e -RRB- ro - `` powerful , holy '' and finally * eis `` strong '' , referencing iron 's strength as a metal .
Kluge relates * isarnon to Illyric and Latin ira , ` wrath ' -LSB- 4 -RSB- -RRB- The Balto-Slavic names for iron -LRB- for example , Russian железо -LSB- zhelezo -RSB- -RRB- are the only ones to come directly from the Proto-Indo-European * ghelgh - `` iron '' .
In many of these languages , the word for iron may also be used to denote other objects made of iron or steel , or figuratively because of the hardness and strength of the metal .
The Chinese tiě -LRB- traditional 鐵 ; simplified 铁 -RRB- derives from Proto-Sino-Tibetan * hliek , and was borrowed into Japanese as 鉄 tetsu , which also has the native reading kurogane `` black metal '' -LRB- similar to how iron is referenced in the English word blacksmith -RRB- .
Beads made from meteoric iron in 3500 BCE or earlier were found in Gerzah , Egypt by G. A. Wainwright .
The beads contain 7.5 % nickel , which is a signature of meteoric origin since iron found in the Earth 's crust generally has only minuscule nickel impurities .
Meteoric iron was highly regarded due to its origin in the heavens and was often used to forge weapons and tools .
For example , a dagger made of meteoric iron was found in the tomb of Tutankhamun , containing similar proportions of iron , cobalt , and nickel to a meteorite discovered in the area , deposited by an ancient meteor shower .
Items that were likely made of iron by Egyptians date from 3000 to 2500 BCE .
Meteoritic iron is comparably soft and ductile and easily forged by cold working but may get brittle when heated because of the nickel content .
An example of the importance of iron 's symbolic role may be found in the German Campaign of 1813 .
Frederick William III commissioned then the first Iron Cross as military decoration .
Berlin iron jewellery reached its peak production between 1813 and 1815 , when the Prussian royal family urged citizens to donate gold and silver jewellery for military funding .
The inscription Gold gab ich für Eisen -LRB- I gave gold for iron -RRB- was used as well in later war efforts .
In gray iron the carbon exists as separate , fine flakes of graphite , and also renders the material brittle due to the sharp edged flakes of graphite that produce stress concentration sites within the material .
A newer variant of gray iron , referred to as ductile iron is specially treated with trace amounts of magnesium to alter the shape of graphite to spheroids , or nodules , reducing the stress concentrations and vastly increasing the toughness and strength of the material .
Mild steel corrodes more readily than wrought iron , but is cheaper and more widely available .
Carbon steel contains 2.0 % carbon or less , with small amounts of manganese , sulfur , phosphorus , and silicon .
Recent developments in ferrous metallurgy have produced a growing range of microalloyed steels , also termed ` HSLA ' or high-strength , low alloy steels , containing tiny additions to produce high strengths and often spectacular toughness at minimal cost .
Apart from traditional applications , iron is also used for protection from ionizing radiation .
The attenuation of radiation as a function of energy is shown in the graph .
When loss of iron is not adequately compensated by adequate dietary iron intake , a state of latent iron deficiency occurs , which over time leads to iron-deficiency anemia if left untreated , which is characterised by an insufficient number of red blood cells and an insufficient amount of hemoglobin .
Most cases of iron-deficiency anemia are mild , but if not treated can cause problems like fast or irregular heartbeat , complications during pregnancy , and delayed growth in infants and children .
In addition to causing power loss , in resonant circuits this can reduce the Q factor of the circuit , broadening the bandwidth .
In RF inductors , which are mostly air core types , specialized construction techniques are used to minimize these losses .
An electric current flowing through a conductor generates a magnetic field surrounding it .
Any changes of current and therefore in the magnetic flux through the cross-section of the inductor creates an opposing electromotive force in the conductor .
The inductance -LRB- L -RRB- characterizes this behavior of an inductor and is defined in terms of that opposing electromotive force or its generated magnetic flux -LRB-
Neglecting losses , the energy -LRB- measured in joules , in SI -RRB- stored by an inductor is equal to the amount of work required to establish the current through the inductor , and therefore the magnetic field .
Notice that Q increases linearly with frequency if L and R are constant .
Although they are constant at low frequencies , the parameters vary with frequency .
For example , skin effect , proximity effect , and core losses increase R with frequency ; winding capacitance and variations in permeability with frequency affect L.
Any change in the current through an inductor creates a changing flux , inducing a voltage across the inductor .
By Faraday 's law of induction , the voltage induced by any change in magnetic flux through the circuit is
Merchant Francis Cabot Lowell from Newburyport , Massachusetts memorised the design of textile machines on his tour of British factories in 1810 .
Realising that the War of 1812 had ruined his import business but that a demand for domestic finished cloth was emerging in America , on his return to the United States , he set up the Boston Manufacturing Company .
Lowell and his partners built America 's second cotton-to-cloth textile mill at Waltham , Massachusetts , second to the Beverly Cotton Manufactory .
After his death in 1817 , his associates built America 's first planned factory town , which they named after him .
This enterprise was capitalised in a public stock offering , one of the first uses of it in the United States .
Lowell , Massachusetts , using 5.6 miles -LRB- 9.0 km -RRB- of canals and 10,000 horsepower delivered by the Merrimack River , is considered by some as a major contributor to the success of the American Industrial Revolution .
The short-lived utopia-like Waltham-Lowell system was formed , as a direct response to the poor working conditions in Britain .
However , by 1850 , especially following the Irish Potato Famine , the system had been replaced by poor immigrant labour .
The industrial revolution began about 1870 as Meiji period leaders decided to catch up with the West .
The government built railroads , improved roads , and inaugurated a land reform programme to prepare the country for further development .
It inaugurated a new Western-based education system for all young people , sent thousands of students to the United States and Europe , and hired more than 3,000 Westerners to teach modern science , mathematics , technology , and foreign languages in Japan -LRB- Foreign government advisors in Meiji Japan -RRB- .
During the Industrial Revolution an intellectual and artistic hostility towards the new industrialisation developed , associated with the Romantic movement .
Romanticism revered the traditionalism of rural life and recoiled against the upheavals caused by industrialization , urbanization and the wretchedness of the working classes .
Its major exponents in English included the artist and poet William Blake and poets William Wordsworth , Samuel Taylor Coleridge , John Keats , Lord Byron and Percy Bysshe Shelley .
The movement stressed the importance of `` nature '' in art and language , in contrast to `` monstrous '' machines and factories ; the `` Dark satanic mills '' of Blake 's poem `` And did those feet in ancient time '' .
Mary Shelley 's novel Frankenstein reflected concerns that scientific progress might be two-edged .
Until the 1980s , it was universally believed by academic historians that technological innovation was the heart of the Industrial Revolution and the key enabling technology was the invention and improvement of the steam engine .
However , recent research into the Marketing Era has challenged the traditional , supply-oriented interpretation of the Industrial Revolution .
The stable political situation in Britain from around 1688 following the Glorious Revolution , and British society 's greater receptiveness to change -LRB- compared with other European countries -RRB- can also be said to be factors favouring the Industrial Revolution .
Peasant resistance to industrialisation was largely eliminated by the Enclosure movement , and the landed upper classes developed commercial interests that made them pioneers in removing obstacles to the growth of capitalism .
-LRB- This point is also made in Hilaire Belloc 's The Servile State . -RRB-
These advances were capitalised on by entrepreneurs , of whom the best known is Richard Arkwright .
He is credited with a list of inventions , but these were actually developed by such people as Thomas Highs and John Kay ; Arkwright nurtured the inventors , patented the ideas , financed the initiatives , and protected the machines .
He created the cotton mill which brought the production processes together in a factory , and he developed the use of power -- first horse power and then water power -- which made cotton manufacture a mechanised industry .
Before long steam power was applied to drive textile machinery .
Manchester acquired the nickname Cottonopolis during the early 19th century owing to its sprawl of textile factories .
Wrought iron for smiths to forge into consumer goods was still made in finery forges , as it long had been .
However , new processes were adopted in the ensuing years .
The first is referred to today as potting and stamping , but this was superseded by Henry Cort 's puddling process .
Cort developed two significant iron manufacturing processes : rolling in 1783 and puddling in 1784 .
Rolling replaced hammering for consolidating wrought iron and expelling some of the dross .
Roller mills were first used for making sheets , but also were developed for rolling structural shapes such as angles and rails .
Puddling was a means of decarburizing pig iron by slow oxidation , with iron ore as the oxygen source , as the iron was manually stirred using a long rod .
The decarburized iron , having a higher melting point than cast iron , was raked into globs by the puddler .
When the glob was large enough the puddler would remove it .
Puddling was done in a reverberatory furnace , allowing coal or coke to be used as fuel .
The puddling process continued to be used until the late 19th century when iron was being displaced by steel .
Because puddling required human skill in sensing the iron globs , it was never successfully mechanised .
Two decades before the Industrial Revolution an improvement was made in the production of steel , which was an expensive commodity and used only where iron would not do , such as for cutting edge tools and for springs .
Benjamin Huntsman developed his crucible steel technique in the 1740s .
The raw material for this was blister steel , made by the cementation process .
Steam locomotives began being built after the introduction of high pressure steam engines after the expiration of the Boulton and Watt patent in 1800 .
High pressure engines exhausted used steam to the atmosphere , doing away with the condenser and cooling water .
A few of these early locomotives were used in mines .
Steam-hauled public railways began with the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825 .
Later machinery such as spinning frames , spinning mules and power looms were expensive -LRB- especially if water powered -RRB- , giving rise to capitalist ownership of factories .
Many workers , who had nothing but their labour to sell , became factory workers out of necessity .
For example , a group of English workers known as Luddites formed to protest against industrialisation and sometimes sabotaged factories .
As stated in Article 93 of the UN Charter , all 193 UN members are automatically parties to the Court 's statute .
Non-UN members may also become parties to the Court 's statute under the Article 93 -LRB- 2 -RRB- procedure .
For example , before becoming a UN member state , Switzerland used this procedure in 1948 to become a party , and Nauru became a party in 1988 .
Once a state is a party to the Court 's statute , it is entitled to participate in cases before the Court .
However , being a party to the statute does not automatically give the Court jurisdiction over disputes involving those parties .
First , 36 -LRB- 1 -RRB- provides that parties may refer cases to the Court -LRB- jurisdiction founded on `` special agreement '' or `` compromis '' -RRB- .
This method is based on explicit consent rather than true compulsory jurisdiction .
It is , perhaps , the most effective basis for the Court 's jurisdiction because the parties concerned have a desire for the dispute to be resolved by the Court and are thus more likely to comply with the Court 's judgment .
Established in 1945 by the UN Charter , the Court began work in 1946 as the successor to the Permanent Court of International Justice .
The Statute of the International Court of Justice , similar to that of its predecessor , is the main constitutional document constituting and regulating the Court .
The system may seem strange when compared with domestic court processes , but its purpose is to encourage states to submit cases .
For example , if a state knows that it will have a judicial officer who can participate in deliberation and offer other judges local knowledge and an understanding of the state 's perspective , it may be more willing to submit to the jurisdiction of the court .
Ad hoc judges usually -LRB- but not always -RRB- vote in favor of the state that appointed them and thus cancel each other out .
In humans , this response is activated by complement binding to antibodies that have attached to these microbes or the binding of complement proteins to carbohydrates on the surfaces of microbes .
This recognition signal triggers a rapid killing response .
The speed of the response is a result of signal amplification that occurs following sequential proteolytic activation of complement molecules , which are also proteases .
After complement proteins initially bind to the microbe , they activate their protease activity , which in turn activates other complement proteases , and so on .
This produces a catalytic cascade that amplifies the initial signal by controlled positive feedback .
The cascade results in the production of peptides that attract immune cells , increase vascular permeability , and opsonize -LRB- coat -RRB- the surface of a pathogen , marking it for destruction .
This deposition of complement can also kill cells directly by disrupting their plasma membrane .
Chronic granulomatous disease , where phagocytes have a reduced ability to destroy pathogens , is an example of an inherited , or congenital , immunodeficiency .
Another important role of the immune system is to identify and eliminate tumors .
This is called immune surveillance .
The transformed cells of tumors express antigens that are not found on normal cells .
To the immune system , these antigens appear foreign , and their presence causes immune cells to attack the transformed tumor cells .
The antigens expressed by tumors have several sources ; some are derived from oncogenic viruses like human papillomavirus , which causes cervical cancer , while others are the organism 's own proteins that occur at low levels in normal cells but reach high levels in tumor cells .
One example is an enzyme called tyrosinase that , when expressed at high levels , transforms certain skin cells -LRB- e.g. melanocytes -RRB- into tumors called melanomas .
A third possible source of tumor antigens are proteins normally important for regulating cell growth and survival , that commonly mutate into cancer inducing molecules called oncogenes .
Conversely , some hormones are regulated by the immune system , notably thyroid hormone activity .
The age-related decline in immune function is also related to decreasing vitamin D levels in the elderly .
As people age , two things happen that negatively affect their vitamin D levels .
First , they stay indoors more due to decreased activity levels .
This means that they get less sun and therefore produce less cholecalciferol via UVB radiation .
Second , as a person ages the skin becomes less adept at producing vitamin D.
Particularly important was the work of Paul Ehrlich , who proposed the side-chain theory to explain the specificity of the antigen-antibody reaction ; his contributions to the understanding of humoral immunity were recognized by the award of a Nobel Prize in 1908 , which was jointly awarded to the founder of cellular immunology , Elie Metchnikoff .
Overnutrition is associated with diseases such as diabetes and obesity , which are known to affect immune function .
More moderate malnutrition , as well as certain specific trace mineral and nutrient deficiencies , can also compromise the immune response .
Chemical barriers also protect against infection .
The skin and respiratory tract secrete antimicrobial peptides such as the β-defensins .
Vaginal secretions serve as a chemical barrier following menarche , when they become slightly acidic , while semen contains defensins and zinc to kill pathogens .
In the stomach , gastric acid and proteases serve as powerful chemical defenses against ingested pathogens .
During the Second World War , some new types of toys were created through accidental innovation .
After trying to create a replacement for synthetic rubber , the American Earl L. Warrick inadvertently invented `` nutty putty '' during World War II .
Later , Peter Hodgson recognized the potential as a childhood plaything and packaged it as Silly Putty .
Similarly , Play-Doh was originally created as a wallpaper cleaner .
In 1943 Richard James was experimenting with springs as part of his military research when he saw one come loose and fall to the floor .
He was intrigued by the way it flopped around on the floor .
He spent two years fine-tuning the design to find the best gauge of steel and coil ; the result was the Slinky , which went on to sell in stores throughout the United States .
In some cultures , societies utilize toys as a way to enhance a child 's skillset within the traditional boundaries of their future roles in the community .
In Saharan and North African cultures , play is facilitated by children through the use of toys in order to enact scenes recognizable in their community such as hunting and herding .
The value is placed in a realistic version of development in preparing a child for the future they are likely to grow up into .
This allows the child to imagine and create a personal interpretation of how they view the adult world .
The oldest and , perhaps most common construction toy is a set of simple wooden blocks , which are often painted in bright colors and given to babies and toddlers .
Construction sets such as Lego bricks and Lincoln Logs are designed for slightly older children and have been quite popular in the last century .
Construction sets appeal to children -LRB- and adults -RRB- who like to work with their hands , puzzle solvers , and imaginative sorts .
Digital toys are toys that incorporate some form of interactive digital technology .
Examples of digital toys include virtual pets and handheld electronic games .
Among the earliest digital toys are Mattel Auto Race and the Little Professor , both released in 1976 .
The concept of using technology in a way that bridges the digital with the physical world , providing unique interactive experiences for the user has also been referred to as `` Phygital . ''
Playing with these sorts of toys allows children to exercise , building strong bones and muscles and aiding in physical fitness .
Jumping rope , -LRB- also known as skipping -RRB- and playing with foot bags can improve balance .
The S and L bands are based on less well established technology , and are not as widely deployed .
IR data transmission of encoded audio versions of printed signs is being researched as an aid for visually impaired people through the RIAS -LRB- Remote Infrared Audible Signage -RRB- project .
Transmitting IR data from one device to another is sometimes referred to as beaming .
In June 1325 , at the age of twenty-one , Ibn Battuta set off from his hometown on a hajj , or pilgrimage , to Mecca , a journey that would ordinarily take sixteen months .
Ibn Battuta 's ship almost sank on embarking from Sri Lanka , only for the vessel that came to his rescue to suffer an attack by pirates .
Stranded onshore , he worked his way back to the Madurai kingdom in India .
Ibn Battuta said that Hangzhou was one of the largest cities he had ever seen , and he noted its charm , describing that the city sat on a beautiful lake surrounded by gentle green hills .
During his stay at Hangzhou he was particularly impressed by the large number of well-crafted and well-painted Chinese wooden ships , with colored sails and silk awnings , assembling in the canals .
Later he attended a banquet of the Yuan Mongol administrator of the city named Qurtai , who according to Ibn Battuta , was very fond of the skills of local Chinese conjurers .
Ibn Battuta also mentions locals who worship the Solar deity .
We do not have words for people who doubt that Elvis is still alive or that aliens have traversed the galaxy only to molest ranchers and their cattle .
Atheism is nothing more than the noises reasonable people make in the presence of unjustified religious beliefs .
Criticism of Christianity became increasingly frequent in the 17th and 18th centuries , especially in France and England , where there appears to have been a religious malaise , according to contemporary sources .
Some Protestant thinkers , such as Thomas Hobbes , espoused a materialist philosophy and skepticism toward supernatural occurrences , while Spinoza rejected divine providence in favor of a panentheistic naturalism .
By the late 17th century , deism came to be openly espoused by intellectuals such as John Toland who coined the term `` pantheist '' .
Atheism in the 20th century , particularly in the form of practical atheism , advanced in many societies .
Atheistic thought found recognition in a wide variety of other , broader philosophies , such as existentialism , objectivism , secular humanism , nihilism , anarchism , logical positivism , Marxism , feminism , and the general scientific and rationalist movement .
A 2010 survey found that those identifying themselves as atheists or agnostics are on average more knowledgeable about religion than followers of major faiths .
Nonbelievers scored better on questions about tenets central to Protestant and Catholic faiths .
Only Mormon and Jewish faithful scored as well as atheists and agnostics .
These atheists generally seek to disassociate themselves from the mass political atheism that gained ascendency in various nations in the 20th century .
In best selling books , the religiously motivated terrorist events of 9/11 and the partially successful attempts of the Discovery Institute to change the American science curriculum to include creationist ideas , together with support for those ideas from George W. Bush in 2005 , have been cited by authors such as Harris , Dennett , Dawkins , Stenger , and Hitchens as evidence of a need to move society towards atheism .
Philosophers such as Antony Flew and Michael Martin have contrasted positive -LRB- strong/hard -RRB- atheism with negative -LRB- weak/soft -RRB- atheism .
Negative atheism includes all other forms of non-theism .
The terms weak and strong are relatively recent , while the terms negative and positive atheism are of older origin , having been used -LRB- in slightly different ways -RRB- in the philosophical literature and in Catholic apologetics .
Under this demarcation of atheism , most agnostics qualify as negative atheists .
A second bailout package of more than $ 100 billion was agreed over the course of a few months from October 2011 , during which time Papandreou was forced from office .
The so-called Troika , of which the IMF is part , are joint managers of this programme , which was approved by the Executive Directors of the IMF on 15 March 2012 for SDR23 .8 billion , and which saw private bondholders take a haircut of upwards of 50 % .
In the interval between May 2010 and February 2012 the private banks of Holland , France and Germany reduced exposure to Greek debt from $ 122 billion to $ 66 billion .
Secondly , the Fund worked on the incorrect assumption that all payments disequilibria were caused domestically .
The Group of 24 -LRB- G-24 -RRB- , on behalf of LDC members , and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development -LRB- UNCTAD -RRB- complained that the IMF did not distinguish sufficiently between disequilibria with predominantly external as opposed to internal causes .
This criticism was voiced in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis .
Then LDCs found themselves with payments deficits due to adverse changes in their terms of trade , with the Fund prescribing stabilisation programmes similar to those suggested for deficits caused by government over-spending .
Faced with long-term , externally generated disequilibria , the G-24 argued for more time for LDCs to adjust their economies .
In Orientalism -LRB- 1978 -RRB- , Edward Said said that the West developed the concept of The Orient -- an imagined geography of the Eastern world -- which functions as an essentializing discourse that represents neither the ethnic diversity nor the social reality of the Eastern world .
That by reducing the East into cultural essences , the imperial discourse uses place-based identities to create cultural difference and psychologic distance between `` We , the West '' and `` They , the East '' and between `` Here , in the West '' and `` There , in the East '' .
To better illustrate this idea , Bassett focuses his analysis of the role of nineteenth-century maps during the `` scramble for Africa '' .
He states that maps `` contributed to empire by promoting , assisting , and legitimizing the extension of French and British power into West Africa '' .
During his analysis of nineteenth-century cartographic techniques , he highlights the use of blank space to denote unknown or unexplored territory .
This provided incentives for imperial and colonial powers to obtain `` information to fill in blank spaces on contemporary maps '' .
Imperialism has played an important role in the histories of Japan , Korea , India , China , Assyria , Ancient Egypt , Ancient Greece , the Roman Empire , the Byzantine Empire , the Persian Empire , the Ottoman Empire , the British Empire , and many other empires .
Historically recognized Muslim empires number in the dozens .
Sub-Saharan Africa has also featured dozens of empires that predate the European colonial era , for example the Ethiopian Empire , Oyo Empire , Asante Union , Luba Empire , Lunda Empire , and Mutapa Empire .
Along with advancements in communication , Europe also continued to advance in military technology .
European chemists made deadly explosives that could be used in combat , and with innovations in machinery they were able to manufacture improved firearms .
By the 1880s , the machine gun had become an effective battlefield weapon .
This technology gave European armies an advantage over their opponents , as armies in less-developed countries were still fighting with arrows , swords , and leather shields -LRB- e.g. the Zulus in Southern Africa during the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879 -RRB- .
`` The word 'em pire ' comes from the Latin word imperium ; for which the closest modern English equivalent would perhaps be ` sovereignty ' , or simply ` rule ' '' .
The greatest distinction of an empire is through the amount of land that a nation has conquered and expanded .
The Russian leader Lenin suggested that `` imperialism was the highest form of capitalism , claiming that imperialism developed after colonialism , and was distinguished from colonialism by monopoly capitalism '' .
This idea from Lenin stresses how important new political world order has become in our modern era .
Geopolitics now focuses on states becoming major economic players in the market ; some states today are viewed as empires due to their political and economic authority over other nations .
Political power grew from conquering land , however cultural and economic aspects flourished through sea and trade routes .
A distinction about empires is `` that although political empires were built mostly by expansion overland , economic and cultural influences spread at least as much by sea '' .
Some of the main aspects of trade that went overseas consisted of animals and plant products .
European empires in Asia and Africa `` have come to be seen as the classic forms of imperialism : and indeed most books on the subject confine themselves to the European seaborne empires '' .
European expansion caused the world to be divided by how developed and developing nation are portrayed through the world systems theory .
The core consists of high areas of income and profit ; the periphery is on the opposing side of the spectrum consisting of areas of low income and profit .
These critical theories of Geo-politics have led to increased discussion of the meaning and impact of imperialism on the modern post-colonial world .
Some have described the internal strife between various people groups as a form of imperialism or colonialism .
Through the treatment of its indigenous peoples during westward expansion , the United States took on the form of an imperial power prior to any attempts at external imperialism .
Participation in the African slave trade and the subsequent treatment of its 12 to 15 million Africans is viewed by some to be a more modern extension of America 's `` internal colonialism '' .
However , this internal colonialism faced resistance , as external colonialism did , but the anti-colonial presence was far less prominent due to the nearly complete dominance that the United States was able to assert over both indigenous peoples and African-Americans .
In his lecture on April 16 , 2003 , Edward Said made a bold statement on modern imperialism in the United States , whom he described as using aggressive means of attack towards the contemporary Orient , `` due to their backward living , lack of democracy and the violation of women 's rights .
The western world forgets during this process of converting the other that enlightenment and democracy are concepts that not all will agree upon '' .
Nowadays , a yardstick used to determine the best locations for wind energy development is referred to as wind power density -LRB- WPD -RRB- .
It is a calculation relating to the effective force of the wind at a particular location , frequently expressed in terms of the elevation above ground level over a period of time .
In 2011 wind energy was also used to power the longest journey in a wind powered car which travelled a distance of 5,000 km -LRB- 3,100 miles -RRB- from Perth to Melbourne in Australia .
Color coded maps are prepared for a particular area are described as , for example , `` mean annual power density at 50 meters . ''
The results of the above calculation are included in an index developed by the National Renewable Energy Lab and referred to as `` NREL CLASS . ''
Although wind produced only about 1.5 % of worldwide electricity use in 2009 , it is growing rapidly , having doubled in the three years between 2005 and 2008 .
One study indicates that an entirely renewable energy supply based on 70 % wind is attainable at today 's power prices by linking wind farms with an HVDC supergrid.Wind power has expanded quickly , its share of worldwide electricity usage at the end of 2014 was 3.1 % .
Kamikaze -LRB- 神風 -RRB- is a Japanese word , usually translated as divine wind , believed to be a gift from the gods .
The term is first known to have been used as the name of a pair or series of typhoons that are said to have saved Japan from two Mongol fleets under Kublai Khan that attacked Japan in 1274 and again in 1281 .
Protestant Wind is a name for the storm that deterred the Spanish Armada from an invasion of England in 1588 where the wind played a pivotal role , or the favorable winds that enabled William of Orange to invade England in 1688 .
During Napoleon 's Egyptian Campaign , the French soldiers had a hard time with the khamsin wind : when the storm appeared `` as a blood-stint in the distant sky '' , the natives went to take cover , while the French `` did not react until it was too late , then choked and fainted in the blinding , suffocating walls of dust . ''
During the North African Campaign of the World War II , `` allied and German troops were several times forced to halt in mid-battle because of sandstorms caused by khamsin ... Grains of sand whirled by the wind blinded the soldiers and created electrical disturbances that rendered compasses useless . ''
The fastest wind ever recorded is coming from the accretion disc of the IGR J17091-3624 black hole .
Rather than air , the solar wind is a stream of charged particles -- a plasma -- ejected from the upper atmosphere of the sun at a rate of 400 kilometers per second -LRB- 890,000 mph -RRB- .
The stream of particles varies in temperature and speed with the passage of time .
These particles are able to escape the sun 's gravity , in part because of the high temperature of the corona , but also because of high kinetic energy that particles gain through a process that is not well-understood .
The solar wind creates the Heliosphere , a vast bubble in the interstellar medium surrounding the Solar System .
Planets require large magnetic fields in order to reduce the ionization of their upper atmosphere by the solar wind .
Other phenomena caused by the solar wind include geomagnetic storms that can knock out power grids on Earth , the aurorae such as the Northern Lights , and the plasma tails of comets that always point away from the sun .
Twain moved to San Francisco in 1864 , still as a journalist , and met writers such as Bret Harte and Artemus Ward .
Twain also lost money through his publishing house of Charles L. Webster and Company , which enjoyed initial success selling the memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant but went broke soon afterward , losing money on a biography of Pope Leo XIII .
Twain and his family closed down their expensive Hartford home in response to the dwindling income and moved to Europe in June 1891 .
Twain , Olivia , and their daughter Susy were all faced with health problems , and they believed that it would be of benefit to visit European baths .
The family stayed mainly in France , Germany , and Italy until May 1895 , with longer spells at Berlin -LRB- winter 1891/92 -RRB- , Florence -LRB- fall and winter 1892/93 -RRB- , and Paris -LRB- winters and springs 1893/94 and 1894/95 -RRB- .
During that period , Twain returned four times to New York due to his enduring business troubles .
Twain 's next work drew on his experiences on the Mississippi River .
Old Times on the Mississippi was a series of sketches published in the Atlantic Monthly in 1875 featuring his disillusionment with Romanticism .
Old Times eventually became the starting point for Life on the Mississippi .
They were murdered at point-blank range while sleeping in the early hours of December 17 , 1996 in the ICRC field hospital in the Chechen city of Nowije Atagi near Grozny .
ICRC is active in the Afghanistan conflict areas and has set up six physical rehabilitation centers to help landmine victims .
Their support extends to the national and international armed forces , civilians and the armed opposition .
They regularly visit detainees under the custody of the Afghan government and the international armed forces , but have also occasionally had access since 2009 to people detained by the Taliban .
They have provided basic first aid training and aid kits to both the Afghan security forces and Taliban members because , according to an ICRC spokesperson , `` ICRC 's constitution stipulates that all parties harmed by warfare will be treated as fairly as possible '' .
Despite formal independence regarding its organizational structure and work , each national society is still bound by the laws of its home country .
In many countries , national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies enjoy exceptional privileges due to agreements with their governments or specific `` Red Cross Laws '' granting full independence as required by the International Movement .
The duties and responsibilities of a national society as defined by International Humanitarian Law and the statutes of the Movement include humanitarian aid in armed conflicts and emergency crises such as natural disasters through activities such as Restoring Family Links .
Following the broadcast of the documentary , the Red Cross announced publicly that it would appoint an individual outside the organization to investigate the allegations made in the film and any responsibility on its part .
Piotr Obuchowicz was appointed to investigate the matter .
The report categorically states that the Red Cross personnel accused of involvement were proven not to have been present ; that a white helicopter was probably used in a military operation , but the helicopter was not a Red Cross helicopter , and must have been painted by one of several military organizations operating in the region at the time .
Perhaps the Red Cross logo itself was also used , although no hard evidence was found for this ; that this was part of the military operation to free the hostages , but was clearly intended to achieve surprise by deceiving the local people into thinking that a Red Cross helicopter was landing ; and that the Red Cross should have responded more quickly and thoroughly to investigate the allegations than it did .
In July 2010 , following abnormally heavy monsoon rains , the Indus River rose above its banks and started flooding .
The rain continued for the next two months , devastating large areas of Pakistan .
In early August , the heaviest flooding moved southward along the Indus River from severely affected northern regions toward western Punjab , where at least 1,400,000 acres -LRB- 570,000 ha -RRB- of cropland was destroyed , and the southern province of Sindh .
As of September 2010 , over two thousand people had died and over a million homes had been destroyed since the flooding began .
On 7 January 1904 Joyce attempted to publish A Portrait of the Artist , an essay-story dealing with aesthetics , only to have it rejected by the free-thinking magazine Dana .
It was a fictional rendering of Joyce 's youth , but he eventually grew frustrated with its direction and abandoned this work .
It was never published in this form , but years later , in Trieste , Joyce completely rewrote it as A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man .
The unfinished Stephen Hero was published after his death .
Joyce returned to Dublin in mid-1909 with George , to visit his father and work on getting Dubliners published .
While preparing to return to Trieste he decided to take one of his sisters , Eva , back with him to help Nora run the home .
With their backing he launched Ireland 's first cinema , the Volta Cinematograph , which was well-received , but fell apart after Joyce left .
Eva became homesick for Dublin and returned there a few years later , but Eileen spent the rest of her life on the continent , eventually marrying Czech bank cashier Frantisek Schaurek .
Umberto Eco compares Joyce to the ancient episcopi vagantes -LRB- wandering bishops -RRB- in the Middle Ages .
Like them , the writer retains the sense of blasphemy held as a liturgical ritual .
Judo -LRB- 柔道 , jūdō , meaning `` gentle way '' -RRB- was created as a physical , mental and moral pedagogy in Japan , in 1882 , by Jigoro Kano -LRB- 嘉納治五郎 -RRB- .
It is generally categorized as a modern martial art which later evolved into a combat and Olympic sport .
Its most prominent feature is its competitive element , where the objective is to either throw or takedown an opponent to the ground , immobilize or otherwise subdue an opponent with a pin , or force an opponent to submit with a joint lock or a choke .
Strikes and thrusts by hands and feet as well as weapons defenses are a part of judo , but only in pre-arranged forms -LRB- kata , 形 -RRB- and are not allowed in judo competition or free practice -LRB- randori , 乱取り -RRB- .
A judo practitioner is called a judoka .
Nage waza include all techniques in which tori attempts to throw or trip uke , usually with the aim of placing uke on his back .
The most recent recognised kata , comprising twenty-one techniques of defence against attack from an unarmed assailant and one armed with a knife , stick and pistol .
This kata incorporates various jujutsu techniques such as wrist locks and atemi waza .
Oshchepkov went on to contribute his knowledge of judo as one of the three founders of Sambo , which also integrated various international and Soviet bloc wrestling styles and other combative techniques .
Oshchepkov died during the political purges of 1937 .
In their History of Sambo , Brett Jacques and Scott Anderson wrote that in Russia `` judo and SOMBO were considered to be the same thing '' -- albeit with a different uniform and some differences in the rules .
Although dan ranks tend to be consistent between national organizations there is more variation in the kyū grades , with some countries having more kyū grades .
The first black belts to denote a dan rank in the 1880s , initially the wide obi was used ; as practitioners trained in kimono , only white and black obi were used .
It was not until the early 1900s , after the introduction of the judogi , that an expanded colored belt system of awarding rank was created .
Verbs are conjugated to show tenses , of which there are two : past and present -LRB- or non-past -RRB- which is used for the present and the future .
For verbs that represent an ongoing process , the - te iru form indicates a continuous -LRB- or progressive -RRB- aspect , similar to the suffix ing in English .
For others that represent a change of state , the - te iru form indicates a perfect aspect .
Words of different origins occupy different registers in Japanese .
Like Latin-derived words in English , kango words are typically perceived as somewhat formal or academic compared to equivalent Yamato words .
Indeed , it is generally fair to say that an English word derived from Latin/French roots typically corresponds to a Sino-Japanese word in Japanese , whereas a simpler Anglo-Saxon word would best be translated by a Yamato equivalent .
Hiragana are used for words without kanji representation , for words no longer written in kanji , and also following kanji to show conjugational endings .
Because of the way verbs -LRB- and adjectives -RRB- in Japanese are conjugated , kanji alone can not fully convey Japanese tense and mood , as kanji can not be subject to variation when written without losing its meaning .
For this reason , hiragana are suffixed to the ends of kanji to show verb and adjective conjugations .
Hiragana used in this way are called okurigana .
Hiragana can also be written in a superscript called furigana above or beside a kanji to show the proper reading .
This is done to facilitate learning , as well as to clarify particularly old or obscure -LRB- or sometimes invented -RRB- readings .
As for kanji for personal names , the circumstances are somewhat complicated .
Jōyō kanji and jinmeiyō kanji -LRB- an appendix of additional characters for names -RRB- are approved for registering personal names .
Names containing unapproved characters are denied registration .
However , as with the list of jōyō kanji , criteria for inclusion were often arbitrary and led to many common and popular characters being disapproved for use .
Under popular pressure and following a court decision holding the exclusion of common characters unlawful , the list of jinmeiyō kanji was substantially extended from 92 in 1951 -LRB- the year it was first decreed -RRB- to 983 in 2004 .
Furthermore , families whose names are not on these lists were permitted to continue using the older forms .
In Japan , more than 90,000 foreign students studied at Japanese universities and Japanese language schools , including 77,000 Chinese and 15,000 South Koreans in 2003 .
In addition , local governments and some NPO groups provide free Japanese language classes for foreign residents , including Japanese Brazilians and foreigners married to Japanese nationals .
In the United Kingdom , study of the Japanese language is supported by the British Association for Japanese Studies .
The Japanese government provides standardized tests to measure spoken and written comprehension of Japanese for second language learners ; the most prominent is the Japanese Language Proficiency Test -LRB- JLPT -RRB- , which features five levels of exams -LRB- changed from four levels in 2010 -RRB- , ranging from elementary -LRB- N5 -RRB- to advanced -LRB- N1 -RRB- .
The JLPT is offered twice a year .
The Japanese External Trade Organization JETRO organizes the Business Japanese Proficiency Test which tests the learner 's ability to understand Japanese in a business setting .
The Japan Kanji Aptitude Testing Foundation , which took over the BJT from JETRO in 2009 , announced in August 2010 that the test would be discontinued in 2011 due to financial pressures on the Foundation .
Brazilian jazz such as bossa nova is derived from samba , with influences from jazz and other 20th-century classical and popular music styles .
Bossa is generally moderately paced , with melodies sung in Portuguese or English , whilst he related term jazz-samba describes an adaptation of street samba into jazz .
The bossa nova style was pioneered by Brazilians João Gilberto and Antônio Carlos Jobim , and was made popular by Elizete Cardoso 's recording of `` Chega de Saudade '' on the Canção do Amor Demais LP .
Gilberto 's initial releases , and the 1959 film Black Orpheus , achieved significant popularity in Latin America ; this spread to North America via visiting American jazz musicians .
The resulting recordings by Charlie Byrd and Stan Getz cemented bossa nova 's popularity and led to a worldwide boom , with 1963 's Getz/Gilberto , numerous recordings by famous jazz performers such as Ella Fitzgerald and Frank Sinatra , and the eventual entrenchment of the bossa nova style as a lasting influence in world music .
The 1980s saw something of a reaction against the Fusion and Free Jazz that had dominated the 1970s .
Trumpeter Wynton Marsalis emerged early in the decade , and strove to create music within what he believed was the tradition , rejecting both fusion and free jazz and creating extensions of the small and large forms initially pioneered by artists such as Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington , as well as the hard bop of the 1950s .
It 's debatable whether Marsalis ' critical and commercial success was a cause or a symptom of the reaction against Fusion and Free Jazz and the resurgence of interest in the kind of jazz pioneered in the 1960s -LRB- particularly Modal Jazz and Post-Bop -RRB- ; nonetheless there were many other manifestations of a resurgence of traditionalism , even if Fusion and Free Jazz were by no means abandoned and continued to develop and evolve .
Usually such music was associated with annual festivals , when the year 's crop was harvested and several days were set aside for celebration .
As late as 1861 , a traveler in North Carolina saw dancers dressed in costumes that included horned headdresses and cow tails and heard music provided by a sheepskin-covered `` gumbo box '' , apparently a frame drum ; triangles and jawbones furnished the auxiliary percussion .
Some of the earliest -LSB- Mississippi -RSB- Delta settlers came from the vicinity of New Orleans , where drumming was never actively discouraged for very long and homemade drums were used to accompany public dancing until the outbreak of the Civil War .
From 1920 to 1933 Prohibition in the United States banned the sale of alcoholic drinks , resulting in illicit speakeasies which became lively venues of the `` Jazz Age '' , hosting popular music including current dance songs , novelty songs and show tunes .
Jazz began to get a reputation as being immoral , and many members of the older generations saw it as threatening the old cultural values and promoting the new decadent values of the Roaring 20s .
The media too began to denigrate jazz .
The New York Times used stories and headlines to pick at jazz : Siberian villagers were said by the paper to have used jazz to scare off bears , when in fact they had used pots and pans ; another story claimed that the fatal heart attack of a celebrated conductor was caused by jazz .
Over time , social strictures regarding racial segregation began to relax in America : white bandleaders began to recruit black musicians and black bandleaders white ones .
In the mid-1930s , Benny Goodman hired pianist Teddy Wilson , vibraphonist Lionel Hampton and guitarist Charlie Christian to join small groups .
In the 1930s , Kansas City Jazz as exemplified by tenor saxophonist Lester Young -LRB- inventor of much of hipster jargon -RRB- marked the transition from big bands to the bebop influence of the 1940s .
An early 1940s style known as `` jumping the blues '' or jump blues used small combos , uptempo music and blues chord progressions , drawing on boogie-woogie from the 1930s .
In the late 1940s there was a revival of `` Dixieland '' music , harking back to the original contrapuntal New Orleans style .
This was driven in large part by record company reissues of early jazz classics by the Oliver , Morton , and Armstrong bands of the 1930s .
There were two types of musicians involved in the revival : the first group was made up of those who had begun their careers playing in the traditional style and were returning to it -LRB- or continuing what they had been playing all along -RRB- , such as Bob Crosby 's Bobcats , Max Kaminsky , Eddie Condon , and Wild Bill Davison .
The second group of revivalists consisted of younger musicians , such as those in the Lu Watters band , Conrad Janis , and Ward Kimball and his Firehouse Five Plus Two Jazz Band .
By the late 1940s , Louis Armstrong 's Allstars band became a leading ensemble .
Countries such as the United States , Israel , Canada , United Kingdom , Argentina and South Africa contain large Jewish populations .
Jewish religious practice varies widely through all levels of observance .
Of that population of connected Jews , 80 % participated in some sort of Jewish religious observance , but only 48 % belonged to a congregation , and fewer than 16 % attend regularly .
The term Judaism derives from Iudaismus , a Latinized form of the Ancient Greek Ἰουδαϊσμός or Ioudaïsmos -LRB- from the verb ἰουδαΐζειν , `` to side with or imitate the -LSB- Judeans -RSB- '' -RRB- , and it was ultimately inspired by the Hebrew יהודה , Yehudah , `` Judah '' ; in Hebrew : יַהֲדוּת , Yahadut .
The term Ἰουδαϊσμός first appears in the Hellenistic Greek book of 2 Maccabees in the 2nd century BCE .
In the context of the age and period it meant `` seeking or forming part of a cultural entity '' and resembled its antonym hellenismos , a word that signified a people 's submission unto Hellenic -LRB- Greek -RRB- cultural norms .
The conflict between iudaismos and hellenismos lay behind the Maccabean revolt and hence the invention of the term iudaismos .
Shaye J. D. Cohen writes in his book The Beginnings of Jewishness :
Reform Judaism , called Liberal or Progressive Judaism in many countries , defines Judaism in relatively universalist terms , rejects most of the ritual and ceremonial laws of the Torah while observing moral laws , and emphasizes the ethical call of the Prophets .
Reform Judaism has developed an egalitarian prayer service in the vernacular -LRB- along with Hebrew in many cases -RRB- and emphasizes personal connection to Jewish tradition .
Sukkot -LRB- `` Tabernacles '' or `` The Festival of Booths '' -RRB- commemorates the Israelites ' forty years of wandering through the desert on their way to the Promised Land .
It is celebrated through the construction of temporary booths called sukkot -LRB- sing .
sukkah -RRB- that represent the temporary shelters of the Israelites during their wandering .
Jews around the world eat in sukkot for seven days and nights .
Sukkot concludes with Shemini Atzeret , where Jews begin to pray for rain and Simchat Torah , `` Rejoicing of the Torah '' , a holiday which marks reaching the end of the Torah reading cycle and beginning all over again .
The occasion is celebrated with singing and dancing with the Torah scrolls .
Shemini Atzeret and Simchat Torah are technically considered to be a separate holiday and not a part of Sukkot .
Over the course of a year , the whole Torah is read , with the cycle starting over in the autumn , on Simchat Torah .
Jewish law also forbids the consumption of meat and dairy products together .
The waiting period between eating meat and eating dairy varies by the order in which they are consumed and by community , and can extend for up to six hours .
Based on the Biblical injunction against cooking a kid in its mother 's milk , this rule is mostly derived from the Oral Torah , the Talmud and Rabbinic law .
Chicken and other kosher birds are considered the same as meat under the laws of kashrut , but the prohibition is Rabbinic , not Biblical .
A wedding takes place under a chuppah , or wedding canopy , which symbolizes a happy house .
At the end of the ceremony , the groom breaks a glass with his foot , symbolizing the continuous mourning for the destruction of the Temple , and the scattering of the Jewish people .
Cook then sailed west to the Siberian coast , and then south-east down the Siberian coast back to the Bering Strait .
He became increasingly frustrated on this voyage , and perhaps began to suffer from a stomach ailment ; it has been speculated that this led to irrational behaviour towards his crew , such as forcing them to eat walrus meat , which they had pronounced inedible .
After a month 's stay , Cook attempted to resume his exploration of the Northern Pacific .
Shortly after leaving Hawaii Island , however , the Resolution 's foremast broke , so the ships returned to Kealakekua Bay for repairs .
The esteem which the islanders nevertheless held for Cook caused them to retain his body .
Following their practice of the time , they prepared his body with funerary rituals usually reserved for the chiefs and highest elders of the society .
The body was disembowelled , baked to facilitate removal of the flesh , and the bones were carefully cleaned for preservation as religious icons in a fashion somewhat reminiscent of the treatment of European saints in the Middle Ages .
Some of Cook 's remains , thus preserved , were eventually returned to his crew for a formal burial at sea .
David Samwell , who sailed with Cook on Resolution , wrote of him : `` He was a modest man , and rather bashful ; of an agreeable lively conversation , sensible and intelligent .
His face was full of expression : his nose extremely well shaped : his eyes which were small and of a brown cast , were quick and piercing ; his eyebrows prominent , which gave his countenance altogether an air of austerity . ''
The first recorded circumnavigation of the world by an animal was by Cook 's goat , who made that memorable journey twice ; the first time on HMS Dolphin , under Samuel Wallis , and then aboard Endeavour .
When they returned to England , Cook had the goat presented with a silver collar engraved with lines from Samuel Johnson : Perpetui , ambita bis terra , praemia lactis Haec habet altrici Capra secunda Jovis .
Cook 's journal recorded the date of the goat 's death : 28 March 1772 .
The `` Doctors ' plot '' was a plot outlined by Stalin and Soviet officials in 1952 and 1953 whereby several doctors -LRB- over half of whom were Jewish -RRB- allegedly attempted to kill Soviet officials .
The prevailing opinion of many scholars outside the Soviet Union is that Stalin intended to use the resulting doctors ' trial to launch a massive party purge .
The plot is also viewed by many historians as an antisemitic provocation .
Some historians have argued that Stalin was also planning to send millions of Jews to four large newly built labor camps in Western Russia using a `` Deportation Commission '' that would purportedly act to save Soviet Jews from an enraged Soviet population after the Doctors Plot trials .
Others argue that any charge of an alleged mass deportation lacks specific documentary evidence .
Regardless of whether a plot to deport Jews was planned , in his `` Secret Speech '' in 1956 , Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev stated that the Doctors Plot was `` fabricated ... set up by Stalin '' , that Stalin told the judge to beat confessions from the defendants and had told Politburo members `` You are blind like young kittens .
The country will perish because you do not know how to recognize enemies . ''
Stomach hemorrhage is usually not caused by high blood pressure , but is , along with stroke , consistent with overdose of warfarin , a colorless , tasteless , anticoagulant drug .
In the treating physicians ' final report submitted to the Central Committee in July 1953 , any mention of the stomach hemorrhage was `` deleted or vastly subordinated to other information . ''
In 2004 , American historian Jonathan Brent and Russia 's Presidential Commission for the Rehabilitation of Repressed Persons executive secretary Vladimir Naumov published a book proposing that Beria , with the complicity of Khrushchev , slipped warfarin into Stalin 's wine on the night of his death .
The Central Committee of the Communist party , the Council of Ministers and the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR announce with deep grief to the party and all workers that on 5 March , at 9.50 p.m. , Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin , Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist party and Chairman of the Council of Ministers , has died after a serious illness .
In a Kremlin video blog posted on 29 October 2009 , Russian President Dmitry Medvedev denounced the efforts of people seeking to rehabilitate Stalin 's image .
Stalin was one of the seven members of the first Politburo , founded in 1917 in order to manage the Bolshevik Revolution , alongside Lenin , Zinoviev , Kamenev , Trotsky , Sokolnikov , and Bubnov .
Among the Bolshevik revolutionaries who took part in the Russian Revolution of 1917 , Stalin was appointed General Secretary of the party 's Central Committee in 1922 .
He remained General Secretary until the post was abolished in 1952 , concurrently serving as the Premier of the Soviet Union from 1941 until 1953 .
Following Lenin 's death , a power struggle began , which involved the following seven Politburo members : Nikolai Bukharin , Lev Kamenev , Alexei Rykov , Joseph Stalin , Mikhail Tomsky , Leon Trotsky , and Grigory Zinoviev .
The Holodomor famine is sometimes referred to as the Ukrainian Genocide , implying it was engineered by the Soviet government , specifically targeting the Ukrainian people to destroy the Ukrainian nation as a political factor and social entity .
While historians continue to disagree whether the policies that led to Holodomor fall under the legal definition of genocide , twenty-six countries have officially recognized the Holodomor as such .
On 28 November 2006 , the Ukrainian Parliament approved a bill declaring the Soviet-era forced famine an act of genocide against the Ukrainian people .
Professor Michael Ellman concludes that Ukrainians were victims of genocide in 1932 -- 33 according to a more relaxed definition that is favored by some specialists in the field of genocide studies .
He asserts that Soviet policies greatly exacerbated the famine 's death toll .
Although 1.8 million tonnes of grain were exported during the height of the starvation -- enough to feed 5 million people for one year -- the use of torture and execution to extract grain under the Law of Spikelets , the use of force to prevent starving peasants from fleeing the worst-affected areas , and the refusal to import grain or secure international humanitarian aid to alleviate conditions led to incalculable human suffering in the Ukraine .
It would appear that Stalin intended to use the starvation as a cheap and efficient means -LRB- as opposed to deportations and shootings -RRB- to kill off those deemed to be `` counterrevolutionaries , '' `` idlers , '' and `` thieves , '' but not to annihilate the Ukrainian peasantry as a whole .
Ellman also claims that , while this was not the only Soviet genocide -LRB- e.g. , the Polish operation of the NKVD -RRB- , it was the worst in terms of mass casualties .
Stalin 's favorite novel Pharaoh , by Polish writer Bolesław Prus , shared similarities with Sergei Eisenstein 's film , Ivan the Terrible , produced under Stalin 's tutelage .
After this campaign , Stalin took actions to bolster the Soviet military , modify training and improve propaganda efforts in the Soviet military .
In June 1940 , Stalin directed the Soviet annexation of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina , proclaiming this formerly Romanian territory part of the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic .
But in annexing northern Bukovina , Stalin had gone beyond the agreed limits of the secret protocol .
By April 1945 , Nazi Germany faced its last days with 1.9 million German soldiers in the East fighting 6.4 million Red Army soldiers while 1 million German soldiers in the West battled 4 million Western Allied soldiers .
While initial talk existed of a race to Berlin by the Allies , after Stalin successfully lobbied for Eastern Germany to fall within the Soviet `` sphere of influence '' at Yalta , no plans were made by the Western Allies to seize the city by a ground operation .
A key figure in the 17th-century scientific revolution , he is best known for his laws of planetary motion , based on his works Astronomia nova , Harmonices Mundi , and Epitome of Copernican Astronomy .
These works also provided one of the foundations for Isaac Newton 's theory of universal gravitation .
Kepler was born on December 27 , the feast day of St John the Evangelist , 1571 , in the Free Imperial City of Weil der Stadt -LRB- now part of the Stuttgart Region in the German state of Baden-Württemberg , 30 km west of Stuttgart 's center -RRB- .
His father , Heinrich Kepler , earned a precarious living as a mercenary , and he left the family when Johannes was five years old .
He was believed to have died in the Eighty Years ' War in the Netherlands .
Born prematurely , Johannes claimed to have been weak and sickly as a child .
Among many other harmonies , Kepler articulated what came to be known as the third law of planetary motion .
When conjoined with Christiaan Huygens ' newly discovered law of centrifugal force , it enabled Isaac Newton , Edmund Halley , and perhaps Christopher Wren and Robert Hooke to demonstrate independently that the presumed gravitational attraction between the Sun and its planets decreased with the square of the distance between them .
This refuted the traditional assumption of scholastic physics that the power of gravitational attraction remained constant with distance whenever it applied between two bodies , such as was assumed by Kepler and also by Galileo in his mistaken universal law that gravitational fall is uniformly accelerated , and also by Galileo 's student Borrelli in his 1666 celestial mechanics .
The Kepler-Kommission also publishes Bibliographia Kepleriana -LRB- 2nd ed .
An undated 36-line edition of the Bible was printed , probably in Bamberg in 1458 -- 60 , possibly by Gutenberg .
A large part of it was shown to have been set from a copy of Gutenberg 's Bible , thus disproving earlier speculation that it may have been the earlier of the two .
A 1568 history by Hadrianus Junius of Holland claims that the basic idea of the movable type came to Gutenberg from Laurens Janszoon Coster via Fust , who was apprenticed to Coster in the 1430s and may have brought some of his equipment from Haarlem to Mainz .
While Coster appears to have experimented with moulds and castable metal type , there is no evidence that he had actually printed anything with this technology .
The author of the Cologne Chronicle of 1499 quotes Ulrich Zell , the first printer of Cologne , that printing was performed in Mainz in 1450 , but that some type of printing of lower quality had previously occurred in the Netherlands .
The first securely dated book by Dutch printers is from 1471 , and the Coster connection is today regarded as a mere legend .
His best-known books , Ficciones -LRB- Fictions -RRB- and El Aleph -LRB- The Aleph -RRB- , published in the 1940s , are compilations of short stories interconnected by common themes , including dreams , labyrinths , libraries , mirrors , fictional writers , philosophy , and religion .
His later collection of poetry , Elogio de la Sombra -LRB- In Praise of Darkness -RRB- , develops this theme .
In 1956 the University of Cuyo awarded Borges the first of many honorary doctorates and the following year he received the National Prize for Literature .
From 1956 to 1970 , Borges also held a position as a professor of literature at the University of Buenos Aires and other temporary appointments at other universities .
In the fall of 1967 and spring of 1968 , he delivered the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures at Harvard University .
Nazism suffers from unreality , like Erigena 's hell .
I shall risk this conjecture : Hitler wants to be defeated .
Hitler is blindly collaborating with the inevitable armies that will annihilate him , as the metal vultures and the dragon -LRB- which must have known that they were monsters -RRB- collaborated , mysteriously , with Hercules . ''
After Evita Perón 's death on 26 July 1952 , Borges received a visit from two policemen , who ordered him to put up two portraits of the ruling couple on the premises of SADE .
Borges indignantly refused , calling it a ridiculous demand .
The Justicialist Party placed Borges under 24-hour surveillance and sent policemen to sit in on his lectures ; in September they ordered SADE to be permanently closed down .
Like much of the Argentine opposition to Perón , SADE had become marginalized due to persecution by the State , and very few active members remained .
Wardrip-Fruin and Montfort argue that Borges `` may have been the most important figure in Spanish-language literature since Cervantes .
He was clearly of tremendous influence , writing intricate poems , short stories , and essays that instantiated concepts of dizzying power . ''
Borges was never awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature , something which continually distressed the writer .
He was one of several distinguished authors who never received the honour .
Borges commented , `` Not granting me the Nobel Prize has become a Scandinavian tradition ; since I was born they have not been granting it to me . ''
Apposition eyes work by gathering a number of images , one from each eye , and combining them in the brain , with each eye typically contributing a single point of information .
The typical apposition eye has a lens focusing light from one direction on the rhabdom , while light from other directions is absorbed by the dark wall of the ommatidium .
The body of Ophiocoma wendtii , a type of brittle star , is covered with ommatidia , turning its whole skin into a compound eye .
The tube feet of sea urchins contain photoreceptor proteins , which together act as a compound eye ; they lack screening pigments , but can detect the directionality of light by the shadow cast by its opaque body .
It is often measured in cycles per degree -LRB- CPD -RRB- , which measures an angular resolution , or how much an eye can differentiate one object from another in terms of visual angles .
Resolution in CPD can be measured by bar charts of different numbers of white/black stripe cycles .
For example , if each pattern is 1.75 cm wide and is placed at 1 m distance from the eye , it will subtend an angle of 1 degree , so the number of white/black bar pairs on the pattern will be a measure of the cycles per degree of that pattern .
The highest such number that the eye can resolve as stripes , or distinguish from a grey block , is then the measurement of visual acuity of the eye .
While social conditioning obviously plays a role , it can also be observed that certain aspects of the masculine identity exist in almost all human cultures .
In the 1920s , as modern journalism was just taking form , writer Walter Lippmann and American philosopher John Dewey debated over the role of journalism in a democracy .
Their differing philosophies still characterize a debate about the role of journalism in society and the nation-state .
Such a code of conduct can , in the real world , be difficult to uphold consistently .
Reporting and editing do not occur in a vacuum but always reflect the political context in which journalists , no less than other citizens , operate .
Journalism is said to serve the role of a `` fourth estate '' , acting as a watchdog on the workings of the government .
A single publication -LRB- such as a newspaper -RRB- contains many forms of journalism , each of which may be presented in different formats .
Each section of a newspaper , magazine , or website may cater to different audiences .
Kilimanjaro National Park generated US $ 51 million in revenue in 2013 , the second-most of any Tanzanian national park .
-LRB- The Ngorongoro Conservation Area , which includes the heavily visited Ngorongoro Crater , is not a national park . -RRB-
The Tanzania National Parks Authority reported that the park recorded 57,456 tourists during the 2011-12 budget year , of whom 16,425 hiked the mountain , which was well below the capacity of 28,470 as specified in the park 's General Management Plan .
The mountain climbers generated irregular and seasonal jobs for about 11,000 guides , porters , and cooks in 2007 , although serious concerns have been raised about their poor working conditions and inadequate wages .
In contrast to the persistent slope glaciers , the glaciers on Kilimanjaro 's crater plateau have appeared and disappeared repeatedly during the Holocene epoch , with each cycle lasting a few hundred years .
It appears that decreasing specific humidity instead of temperature changes has caused the shrinkage of the slope glaciers since the late 19th century .
Although air temperatures at that elevation are always below freezing , solar radiation causes melting on their vertical faces .
`` There is no pathway for the plateau glaciers other than to continuously retreat once their vertical margins are exposed to solar radiation . ''
The Kilimanjaro glaciers have been used for deriving ice core records , including two from the southern icefield .
Based on this data , this icefield formed between 1,250 and 1,450 years BP .
Local legends by the Chagga people tell how a man named Tone once provoked a god , Ruwa , to bring famine upon the land .
The people became angry at Tone , forcing him to flee .
Nobody wanted to protect him but a solitary dweller who had stones that turned miraculously into cattle .
The dweller bid that Tone never open the stable of the cattle .
When Tone did not heed the warning and the cattle escaped , Tone followed it but the fleeing cattle threw up hills to run on , including Mawenzi and Kibo .
Tone finally collapsed on Kibo , ending the pursuit .
Kibo has more than 250 parasitic cones on its northwest and southeast flanks that were formed between 150,000 and 200,000 years ago and erupted picrobasalts , trachybasalts , ankaramites , and basanites .
Most of these cones are well preserved , with the exception of the Saddle Plateau cones that were heavily affected by glacial action .
Despite their mostly small size , lava from the cones has obscured large portions of the mountain .
All Saddle Plateau cones predate the last glaciation .
Al-Quds University was established in 1984 to serve as a flagship university for the Arab and Palestinian peoples .
New York Bard College and Al-Quds University agreed to open a joint college in a building originally built to house the Palestinian Legislative Council and Yasser Arafat 's office .
The college gives Master of Arts in Teaching degrees .
Al-Quds University resides southeast of the city proper on a 190,000 square metres -LRB- 47 acres -RRB- Abu Dis campus .
While some Israelis avoid Jerusalem for its relative lack of development and religious and political tensions , the city has attracted Palestinians , offering more jobs and opportunity than any city in the West Bank or Gaza Strip .
Palestinian officials have encouraged Arabs over the years to stay in the city to maintain their claim .
Palestinians are attracted to the access to jobs , healthcare , social security , other benefits , and quality of life Israel provides to Jerusalem residents .
Arab residents of Jerusalem who choose not to have Israeli citizenship are granted an Israeli identity card that allows them to pass through checkpoints with relative ease and to travel throughout Israel , making it easier to find work .
Residents also are entitled to the subsidized healthcare and social security benefits Israel provides its citizens , and have the right to vote in municipal elections .
Arabs in Jerusalem can send their children to Israeli-run schools , although not every neighborhood has one , and universities .
In addition , Haredi Jews comprise 30 % of the city 's adult Jewish population .
In a phenomenon seen rarely around the world , the percentage of Jewish men who work , 47 % , is exceeded by the percentage of Jewish women who work , 50 % .
The young and less religious continue to leave according to a 2016 Central Bureau of Statistics report which noted 6,740 people left .
The opening of high speed rail transit to Tel Aviv next year and the New Jerusalem Gateway Business District currently under construction is designed to alter business , tourism , and hopefully reverse the population exodus .
The Youth Wing , which mounts changing exhibits and runs an extensive art education program , is visited by 100,000 children a year .
The Ticho House in downtown Jerusalem houses the paintings of Anna Ticho and the Judaica collections of her husband , an ophthalmologist who opened Jerusalem 's first eye clinic in this building in 1912 .
Jerusalem was declared the Capital of Arab Culture in 2009 .
Jerusalem is home to the Palestinian National Theatre , which engages in cultural preservation as well as innovation , working to rekindle Palestinian interest in the arts .
The Edward Said National Conservatory of Music sponsors the Palestine Youth Orchestra which toured Arab states of the Persian Gulf and other Middle East countries in 2009 .
The Islamic Museum on the Temple Mount , established in 1923 , houses many Islamic artifacts , from tiny kohl flasks and rare manuscripts to giant marble columns .
While Israel approves and financially supports some Arab cultural activities , Arab Capital of Culture events were banned because they were sponsored by the Palestine National Authority .
In 2009 , a four-day culture festival was held in the Beit ` Anan suburb of Jerusalem , attended by more than 15,000 people
Much of Haydn 's activity at the time followed the specific musical interest of his patron Prince Nikolaus .
Thus , in about 1765 the Prince obtained , and began to learn to play , the baryton , an uncommon musical instrument similar to the bass viol but with a set of plucked sympathetic strings .
Haydn was commanded to provide music for the Prince to play , and over the next ten years produced about 200 works for this instrument in various ensembles , of which the most notable are the 126 baryton trios .
Around 1775 the Prince abandoned the baryton and took up a new hobby : opera productions , previously a sporadic event for special occasions , became the focus of musical life at court , and the opera theater the Prince had built at Esterháza came to host a major season , with multiple productions each year .
Haydn served as director of the company , recruiting and training the singers and preparing and leading the performances .
He also wrote several of the operas performed -LRB- see List of operas by Joseph Haydn -RRB- and wrote substitution arias to insert into the operas of other composers .
The end of Salomon 's series in June gave Haydn a rare period of relative leisure .
The symphony performed for the occasion , no. 92 has since come to be known as the Oxford Symphony , although it had been written in 1789 .
By the end of 1803 , Haydn 's condition had declined to the point that he became physically unable to compose .
Since diagnosis was uncertain in Haydn 's time , it is unlikely that the precise illness can ever be identified , though Jones suggests arteriosclerosis .
Locke stated his belief , in his Second Treatise , that nature on its own provides little of value to society , implying that the labour expended in the creation of goods gives them their value .
This position can be seen as a labour theory of value .
In the Netherlands , Locke had time to return to his writing , spending a great deal of time re-working the Essay and composing the Letter on Toleration .
Locke did not return home until after the Glorious Revolution .
Locke accompanied William of Orange 's wife back to England in 1688 .
The bulk of Locke 's publishing took place upon his return from exile -- his aforementioned Essay Concerning Human Understanding , the Two Treatises of Civil Government and A Letter Concerning Toleration all appearing in quick succession .
The exhibition opened in March , but received much less attention than she had received in the United States , partly due to the looming Second World War , and made a loss financially , leading Kahlo to cancel a planned exhibition in London .
Regardless , Louvre purchased The Frame , making her the first Mexican artist to be featured in their collection .
She was also warmly received by other Parisian artists , such as Pablo Picasso and Joan Miró , as well as the fashion world , with designer Elsa Schiaparelli designing a dress inspired by her and Vogue Paris featuring her on its pages .
However , her overall opinion of Paris and the Surrealists remained negative ; in a letter to Muray , she called them `` this bunch of coocoo lunatic sons of bitches of surrealists '' who `` are so damn ` intellectual ' and rotten that I ca n't stand them anymore . ''
The demonstration worsened her illness , and on the night of July 12 , 1954 , Kahlo had high fever and was in extreme pain .
The nurse , who counted Kahlo 's painkillers to monitor her drug use , stated that Kahlo had taken an overdose the night she died .
Due to these details , the lack of autopsy , her previous suicide attempt , and the contents of her diary , Herrera has argued that Kahlo had , in fact , committed suicide .
On the evening of July 13 , Kahlo 's body was taken to the Palacio de Bellas Artes , where it laid in state under a Communist flag .
The following day , it was carried to the Panteón Civil de Dolores , where friends and family attended an informal funeral ceremony .
Hundreds of admirers stood outside .
In accordance with her wishes , Kahlo was cremated .
Rivera , who stated that her death was `` the most tragic day of my life '' , died three years later in 1957 .
He bequeathed La Casa Azul to the people of Mexico , and it was opened as a museum in 1958 .
Kahlo 's ashes are displayed at La Casa Azul in a pre-Columbian urn .
`` like a game of telephone , the more Kahlo 's story has been told , the more it has been distorted , omitting uncomfortable details that show her to be a far more complex and flawed figure than the movies and cookbooks suggest .
This elevation of the artist over the art diminishes the public understanding of Kahlo 's place in history and overshadows the deeper and more disturbing truths in her work .
Even more troubling , though , is that by airbrushing her biography , Kahlo 's promoters have set her up for the inevitable fall so typical of women artists , that time when the contrarians will band together and take sport in shooting down her inflated image , and with it , her art . ''
Nehru emerged from the war years as a leader whose political views were considered radical .
Although the political discourse had been dominated at this time by Gopal Krishna Gokhale , a moderate who said that it was `` madness to think of independence '' , Nehru had spoken `` openly of the politics of non-cooperation , of the need of resigning from honorary positions under the government and of not continuing the futile politics of representation '' .
He noted that someone had once defined the Indian Civil Service , `` with which we are unfortunately still afflicted in this country , as neither Indian , nor civil , nor a service '' .
Motilal Nehru , a prominent moderate leader , acknowledged the limits of constitutional agitation , but counselled his son that there was no other `` practical alternative '' to it .
Nehru , however , was not satisfied with the pace of the national movement .
He became involved with aggressive nationalists leaders who were demanding Home Rule for Indians .
Several nationalist leaders banded together in 1916 under the leadership of Annie Besant to voice a demand for self-government , and to obtain the status of a Dominion within the British Empire as enjoyed by Australia , Canada , South Africa , New Zealand and Newfoundland at the time .
Nehru joined the movement and rose to become secretary of Besant 's All India Home Rule League .
In June 1917 Besant was arrested and interned by the British government .
The Congress and various other Indian organisation threatened to launch protests if she were not set free .
The British government was subsequently forced to release Besant and make significant concessions after a period of intense protest .
Nehru was one of the first nationalist leaders to realise the sufferings of the people in the states ruled by Indian Princes .
He suffered imprisonment in Nabha , a princely state , when he went there to see the struggle that was being waged by the Sikhs against the corrupt Mahants .
The nationalist movement had been confined to the territories under direct British rule .
The All India states people 's conference was formed in 1927 .
Nehru who had been supporting the cause of the people of the princely states for many years was made the President of the conference in 1935 .
The body would play an important role during the political integration of India , helping Indian leaders Vallabhbhai Patel and V.P. Menon -LRB- to whom Nehru had delegated the task of integrating the princely states into India -RRB- negotiate with hundreds of princes .
The Salt Satyagraha succeeded in drawing the attention of the world .
Indian , British , and world opinion increasingly began to recognise the legitimacy of the claims by the Congress party for independence .
Nehru considered the salt satyagraha the high-water mark of his association with Gandhi , and felt that its lasting importance was in changing the attitudes of Indians :
In October 1940 , Gandhi and Nehru , abandoning their original stand of supporting Britain , decided to launch a limited civil disobedience campaign in which leading advocates of Indian independence were selected to participate one by one .
Nehru was arrested and sentenced to four years ' imprisonment .
After spending a little more than a year in jail , he was released , along with other Congress prisoners , three days before the bombing of Pearl Harbor in Hawaii .
While Nehru exempted Muslim law from legislation and they remained unreformed , he did pass the Special Marriage Act in 1954 .
The idea behind this act was to give everyone in India the ability to marry outside the personal law under a civil marriage .
As usual the law applied to all of India , except Jammu and Kashmir -LRB- again leading to accusations of selective secularism -RRB- .
In many respects , the act was almost identical to the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 , which gives some idea as to how secularised the law regarding Hindus had become .
The Special Marriage Act allowed Muslims to marry under it and thereby retain the protections , generally beneficial to Muslim women , that could not be found in the personal law .
Under the act polygamy was illegal , and inheritance and succession would be governed by the Indian Succession Act , rather than the respective Muslim Personal Law .
Divorce also would be governed by the secular law , and maintenance of a divorced wife would be along the lines set down in the civil law .
Nehru 's theosophical interests had induced him to the study of the Buddhist and Hindu scriptures .
According to B.R. Nanda , these scriptures were Nehru 's `` first introduction to the religious and cultural heritage of -LSB- India -RSB- ... -LSB- they -RSB- provided Nehru the initial impulse for -LSB- his -RSB- long intellectual quest which culminated ... in The Discovery of India . ''
A member of the Nehru-Gandhi family , Nehru married Kamala Kaul in 1916 .
Their only daughter Indira was born a year later in 1917 .
Kamala gave birth to a boy in November 1924 , but he lived only for a week .
Indira married Feroze Gandhi in 1942 .
In May 1876 , Cambridge University offered to grant honorary degrees of Doctor of Music to both Brahms and Joachim , provided that they composed new pieces as `` theses '' and were present in Cambridge to receive their degrees .
Brahms was averse to traveling to England , and requested to receive the degree ` in absentia ' , offering as his thesis the previously performed -LRB- November 1876 -RRB- symphony .
But of the two , only Joachim went to England and only he was granted a degree .
Brahms `` acknowledged the invitation '' by giving the manuscript score and parts of his first symphony to Joachim , who led the performance at Cambridge March 8 , 1877 -LRB- English premiere -RRB- .
Brahms was now recognised as a major figure in the world of music .
He had been on the jury which awarded the Vienna State Prize to the -LRB- then little-known -RRB- composer Antonín Dvořák three times , first in February 1875 , and later in 1876 and 1877 and had successfully recommended Dvořák to his publisher , Simrock .
The two men met for the first time in 1877 , and Dvořák dedicated to Brahms his String Quartet , Op. 44 of that year .
Johann Jakob gave his son his first musical training ; Johannes also learnt to play the violin and the basics of playing the cello .
Cossel complained in 1842 that Brahms `` could be such a good player , but he will not stop his never-ending composing . ''
At the age of 10 , Brahms made his debut as a performer in a private concert including Beethoven 's quintet for piano and winds Op. 16 and a piano quartet by Mozart .
Brahms 's parents disapproved of his early efforts as a composer , feeling that he had better career prospects as a performer .
Jean d'Orléans , the acting head of the ducal family of Orléans on behalf of his captive half-brother , initially excluded her from war councils and failed to inform her when the army engaged the enemy .
However , his decision to exclude her did not prevent her presence at most councils and battles .
Under ecclesiastical law , Bishop Cauchon lacked jurisdiction over the case .
Cauchon owed his appointment to his partisan support of the English Crown , which financed the trial .
The low standard of evidence used in the trial also violated inquisitorial rules .
Clerical notary Nicolas Bailly , who was commissioned to collect testimony against Joan , could find no adverse evidence .
Without such evidence the court lacked grounds to initiate a trial .
Opening a trial anyway , the court also violated ecclesiastical law by denying Joan the right to a legal adviser .
In addition , stacking the tribunal entirely with pro-English clergy violated the medieval Church 's requirement that heresy trials be judged by an impartial or balanced group of clerics .
Upon the opening of the first public examination , Joan complained that those present were all partisans against her and asked for `` ecclesiastics of the French side '' to be invited in order to provide balance .
The twelve articles of accusation which summarized the court 's findings contradicted the already doctored court record .
The illiterate defendant signed an abjuration document that she did not understand under threat of immediate execution .
The court substituted a different abjuration in the official record .
Joan of Arc has remained a popular figure in literature , painting , sculpture , and other cultural works since the time of her death , and many famous writers , filmmakers and composers have created works about her .
Cultural depictions of her have continued in films , theater , television , video games , music , and performances to this day .
Joan of Arc came from an obscure village and rose to prominence when she was a teenager , and she did so as an uneducated peasant .
The French and English kings had justified the ongoing war through competing interpretations of inheritance law , first concerning Edward III 's claim to the French throne and then Henry VI 's .
The conflict had been a legalistic feud between two related royal families , but Joan transformed it along religious lines and gave meaning to appeals such as that of squire Jean de Metz when he asked , `` Must the king be driven from the kingdom ; and are we to be English ? ''
In the words of Stephen Richey , `` She turned what had been a dry dynastic squabble that left the common people unmoved except for their own suffering into a passionately popular war of national liberation . ''
Richey also expresses the breadth of her subsequent appeal :
After the B12-haptocorrin complexes pass from the stomach via the pylorus to the duodenum , pancreatic proteases cleave haptocorrin from the B12 molecules which rebind to intrinsic factor -LRB- IF -RRB- .
These B12-IF complexes travel to the ileum portion of the small intestine where cubilin receptors enable assimilation and circulation of B12-IF complexes in the blood .
At the same time , work was commissioned to precisely determine the mass of a cubic decimeter -LRB- one liter -RRB- of water .
Although the decreed definition of the kilogram specified water at 0 ° C -- its highly stable temperature point -- the French chemist Louis Lefèvre-Gineau and the Italian naturalist Giovanni Fabbroni after several years of research chose to redefine the standard in 1799 to water 's most stable density point : the temperature at which water reaches maximum density , which was measured at the time as 4 ° C .
They concluded that one cubic decimeter of water at its maximum density was equal to 99.9265 % of the target mass of the provisional kilogram standard made four years earlier .
That same year , 1799 , an all-platinum kilogram prototype was fabricated with the objective that it would equal , as close as was scientifically feasible for the day , the mass of one cubic decimeter of water at 4 ° C .
The prototype was presented to the Archives of the Republic in June and on December 10 , 1799 , the prototype was formally ratified as the kilogramme des Archives -LRB- Kilogram of the Archives -RRB- and the kilogram was defined as being equal to its mass .
This standard stood for the next 90 years .
The watt balance requires extremely precise measurement of the local gravitational acceleration g in the laboratory , using a gravimeter .
For instance , the NIST compensates for Earth 's gravity gradient of 309 µGal per meter when the elevation of the center of the gravimeter differs from that of the nearby test mass in the watt balance ; a change in the weight of a one-kilogram test mass that equates to about 316 µg / m.
A variation on a 12C-based definition proposes to define the Avogadro constant as being precisely 84,446,8893 -LRB- ≈ 7023602214162000000 ♠ 6.02214162 × 1023 -RRB- atoms .
An imaginary realization of a 12-gram mass prototype would be a cube of 12C atoms measuring precisely 84,446,889 atoms across on a side .
As with a definition based upon carbon‑12 , the Avogadro constant would also have been fixed .
The English word `` dome '' ultimately derives from the Latin domus -LRB- `` house '' -RRB- -- which , up through the Renaissance , labeled a revered house , such as a Domus Dei , or `` House of God '' , regardless of the shape of its roof .
This is reflected in the uses of the Italian word duomo , the German/Icelandic/Danish word dom -LRB- `` cathedral '' -RRB- , and the English word dome as late as 1656 , when it meant a `` Town-House , Guild-Hall , State-House , and Meeting-House in a city . ''
The French word dosme came to acquire the meaning of a cupola vault , specifically , by 1660 .
This French definition gradually became the standard usage of the English dome in the eighteenth century as many of the most impressive Houses of God were built with monumental domes , and in response to the scientific need for more technical terms .
The multi-unit mosque uses several domed-squares of similar size along the length of a mosque , or across its width , or both , with the central dome sometimes larger than the others .
A style common in the Bursa period , and known as the `` Bursa type '' , is like a duplication of the single-domed square , with one long space divided by an arch into two square bays that are each covered by a dome .
A variation of this type has the room covered by one dome and one semi-dome , with additional side chambers .
A multi-domed style derived from Seljuk architecture is that of the Ulu Camii , or Great Mosque , which consists of a number of domes of the same size supported by pillars .
On 28 August 1844 , Marx met the German socialist Friedrich Engels at the Café de la Régence , beginning a lifelong friendship .
Engels showed Marx his recently published The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 , convincing Marx that the working class would be the agent and instrument of the final revolution in history .
Soon Marx and Engels were collaborating on a criticism of the philosophical ideas of Marx 's former friend , Bruno Bauer .
This work was published in 1845 as The Holy Family .
Although critical of Bauer , Marx was increasingly influenced by the ideas of the Young Hegelians Max Stirner and Ludwig Feuerbach , but eventually Marx and Engels abandoned Feuerbachian materialism as well .
In collaboration with Engels , Marx also set about writing a book which is often seen as his best treatment of the concept of historical materialism , The German Ideology .
In this work , Marx broke with Ludwig Feuerbach , Bruno Bauer , Max Stirner and the rest of the Young Hegelians , and also broke with Karl Grun and other `` true socialists '' whose philosophies were still based in part on `` idealism '' .
In German Ideology Marx and Engels finally completed their philosophy , which was based solely on materialism as the sole motor force in history .
After completing German Ideology , Marx turned to a work that was intended to clarify his own position regarding `` the theory and tactics '' of a truly `` revolutionary proletarian movement '' operating from the standpoint of a truly `` scientific materialist '' philosophy .
This work was intended to draw a distinction between the utopian socialists and Marx 's own scientific socialist philosophy .
Whereas the utopians believed that people must be persuaded one person at a time to join the socialist movement , the way a person must be persuaded to adopt any different belief , Marx knew that people would tend on most occasions to act in accordance with their own economic interests .
Thus , appealing to an entire class -LRB- the working class in this case -RRB- with a broad appeal to the class 's best material interest would be the best way to mobilise the broad mass of that class to make a revolution and change society .
This was the intent of the new book that Marx was planning .
However , to get the manuscript past the government censors , Marx called the book The Poverty of Philosophy -LRB- 1847 -RRB- and offered it as a response to the `` petty bourgeois philosophy '' of the French anarchist socialist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon as expressed in his book The Philosophy of Poverty -LRB- 1840 -RRB- .
During the last decade of his life , Marx 's health declined and he became incapable of the sustained effort that had characterised his previous work .
He did manage to comment substantially on contemporary politics , particularly in Germany and Russia .
His Critique of the Gotha Programme opposed the tendency of his followers Wilhelm Liebknecht and August Bebel to compromise with the state socialism of Ferdinand Lassalle in the interests of a united socialist party .
Several of his closest friends spoke at his funeral , including Wilhelm Liebknecht and Friedrich Engels .
Engels ' speech included the passage :
Marx 's view of history , which came to be called historical materialism -LRB- controversially adapted as the philosophy of dialectical materialism by Engels and Lenin -RRB- certainly shows the influence of Hegel 's claim that one should view reality -LRB- and history -RRB- dialectically .
However , Hegel had thought in idealist terms , putting ideas in the forefront , whereas Marx sought to rewrite dialectics in materialist terms , arguing for the primacy of matter over idea .
Where Hegel saw the `` spirit '' as driving history , Marx saw this as an unnecessary mystification , obscuring the reality of humanity and its physical actions shaping the world .
He wrote that Hegelianism stood the movement of reality on its head , and that one needed to set it upon its feet .
Despite his dislike of mystical terms Marx used Gothic language in several of his works .
In Das Kapital he refers to capital as `` necromancy that surrounds the products of labour '' .
Marx believed that he could study history and society scientifically and discern tendencies of history and the resulting outcome of social conflicts .
Some followers of Marx concluded , therefore , that a communist revolution would inevitably occur .
However , Marx famously asserted in the eleventh of his `` Theses on Feuerbach '' that `` philosophers have only interpreted the world , in various ways ; the point however is to change it '' , and he clearly dedicated himself to trying to alter the world .
In this new society , the self-alienation would end , and humans would be free to act without being bound by the labour market .
It would be a democratic society , enfranchising the entire population .
He theorised that between capitalism and the establishment of a socialist/communist system , a dictatorship of the proletariat -- a period where the working class holds political power and forcibly socialises the means of production -- would exist .
Corresponding to this is also a political transition period in which the state can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat . ''
From an academic perspective , Marx 's work contributed to the birth of modern sociology .
In contrast to other philosophers , Marx offered theories that could often be tested with the scientific method .
Both Marx and Auguste Comte set out to develop scientifically justified ideologies in the wake of European secularisation and new developments in the philosophies of history and science .
Working in the Hegelian tradition , Marx rejected Comtean sociological positivism in attempt to develop a science of society .
Karl Löwith considered Marx and Søren Kierkegaard to be the two greatest Hegelian philosophical successors .
In modern sociological theory , Marxist sociology is recognised as one of the main classical perspectives .
Isaiah Berlin considers Marx the true founder of modern sociology , `` in so far as anyone can claim the title '' .
Throughout the twentieth century , revolutions in dozens of countries labelled themselves ` Marxist ' , most notably the Russian Revolution , which led to the founding of the USSR .
Major world leaders including Vladimir Lenin , Mao Zedong , Fidel Castro , Salvador Allende , Josip Broz Tito , and Kwame Nkrumah all cited Marx as an influence , and his ideas informed political parties worldwide beyond those where ` Marxist revolutions ' took place .
The countries associated with some Marxist nations have led political opponents to blame Marx for millions of deaths , but the fidelity of these varied revolutionaries , leaders and parties to Marx 's work is highly contested , and rejected by many Marxists .
It is now common to distinguish between the legacy and influence of Marx specifically , and the legacy and influence of those who shaped his ideas for political purposes .
Karate can be practiced as an art -LRB- budō -RRB- , self defense or as a combat sport .
Modern Japanese style training emphasizes the psychological elements incorporated into a proper kokoro -LRB- attitude -RRB- such as perseverance , fearlessness , virtue , and leadership skills .
Kata is a formalized sequence of movements which represent various offensive and defensive postures .
The applications when applied in a demonstration with real opponents is referred to as a Bunkai .
The Bunkai shows how every stance and movement is used .
France Shotokan Karate was created in 1964 by Tsutomu Ohshima .
However , in 1965 Taiji Kase came from Japan along with Enoeda and Shirai , who went to England and Italy respectively , and karate came under the influence of the JKA .
The Karate Kid -LRB- 1984 -RRB- and its sequels The Karate Kid , Part II -LRB- 1986 -RRB- , The Karate Kid , Part III -LRB- 1989 -RRB- and The Next Karate Kid -LRB- 1994 -RRB- are films relating the fictional story of an American adolescent 's introduction into karate .
Karate Kommandos , an animated children 's show , with Chuck Norris appearing to reveal the moral lessons contained in every episode .
Sakukawa Kanga -LRB- 1782 -- 1838 -RRB- had studied pugilism and staff -LRB- bo -RRB- fighting in China -LRB- according to one legend , under the guidance of Kosokun , originator of kusanku kata -RRB- .
In 1806 he started teaching a fighting art in the city of Shuri that he called `` Tudi Sakukawa , '' which meant `` Sakukawa of China Hand . ''
This was the first known recorded reference to the art of `` Tudi , '' written as 唐手 .
Around the 1820s Sakukawa 's most significant student Matsumura Sōkon -LRB- 1809 -- 1899 -RRB- taught a synthesis of te -LRB- Shuri-te and Tomari-te -RRB- and Shaolin -LRB- Chinese 少林 -RRB- styles .
Matsumura 's style would later become the Shōrin-ryū style .
Variola is a large brick-shaped virus measuring approximately 302 to 350 nanometers by 244 to 270 nm , with a single linear double stranded DNA genome 186 kilobase pairs -LRB- kbp -RRB- in size and containing a hairpin loop at each end .
Smallpox was introduced into the Caribbean island of Hispaniola in 1509 , and into the mainland in 1520 , when Spanish settlers from Hispaniola arrived in Mexico bringing smallpox with them .
Smallpox devastated the native Amerindian population and was an important factor in the conquest of the Aztecs and the Incas by the Spaniards .
Settlement of the east coast of North America in 1633 in Plymouth , Massachusetts was also accompanied by devastating outbreaks of smallpox among Native American populations , and subsequently among the native-born colonists .
Smallpox was introduced into Australia in 1789 and again in 1829 .
In Russia , Peter II of Russia died of the disease at 15 years of age .
Also , prior to becoming Russian Emperor , Peter III caught the virus and suffered greatly from it .
She feared for her son and heir Pavel 's safety so much that she made sure that large crowds were kept at bay and sought to isolate him .
While this was considered a controversial method at the time , she succeeded .
Catherine then sought to have inoculations throughout her empire stating : `` My objective was , through my example , to save from death the multitude of my subjects who , not knowing the value of this technique , and frightened of it , were left in danger . ''
By 1800 , approximately 2 million inoculations were administered in the Russian Empire .
Soviet leader Joseph Stalin fell ill with smallpox at the age of seven .
His face was badly scarred by the disease .
Those who used inhalants are also at significant risk with around 20 % attempting suicide at some point and more than 65 % considering it .
Smoking cigarettes is associated with the risk of suicide .
There is little evidence as to why this association exists ; however it has been hypothesized that those who are predisposed to smoking are also predisposed to suicide , that smoking causes health problems which subsequently make people want to end their life , and that smoking affects brain chemistry causing a propensity for suicide .
Cannabis however does not appear to independently increase the risk .
Worldwide , 30 % of suicides are estimated to occur from pesticide poisoning , most of which occur in the developing world .
The use of this method varies markedly from 4 % in Europe to more than 50 % in the Pacific region .
In many countries , drug overdoses account for approximately 60 % of suicides among women and 30 % among men .
Many are unplanned and occur during an acute period of ambivalence .
The death rate varies by method : firearms 80 -- 90 % , drowning 65 -- 80 % , hanging 60 -- 85 % , car exhaust 40 -- 60 % , jumping 35 -- 60 % , charcoal burning 40 -- 50 % , pesticides 6 -- 75 % , and medication overdose 1.5 -- 4 % .
The most common attempted methods of suicide differ from the most common successful methods ; up to 85 % of attempts are via drug overdose in the developed world .
In those with mental health problems a number of treatments may reduce the risk of suicide .
Those who are actively suicidal may be admitted to psychiatric care either voluntarily or involuntarily .
Possessions that may be used to harm oneself are typically removed .
Some clinicians get patients to sign suicide prevention contracts where they agree to not harm themselves if released .
Short-term hospitalization has not been found to be more effective than community care for improving outcomes in those with borderline personality disorder who are chronically suicidal .
In India , suicide used to be illegal and surviving family could face legal difficulties .
The Indian government repealed this law in 2014 .
In Germany , active euthanasia is illegal and anyone present during suicide may be prosecuted for failure to render aid in an emergency .
Switzerland has recently taken steps to legalize assisted suicide for the chronically mentally ill .
The high court in Lausanne , Switzerland , in a 2006 ruling , granted an anonymous individual with longstanding psychiatric difficulties the right to end his own life .
A number of questions are raised within the philosophy of suicide , included what constitutes suicide , whether or not suicide can be a rational choice , and the moral permissibility of suicide .
Arguments as to acceptability of suicide in moral or social terms range from the position that the act is inherently immoral and unacceptable under any circumstances to a regard for suicide as a sacrosanct right of anyone who believes they have rationally and conscientiously come to the decision to end their own lives , even if they are young and healthy .
Factors that affect the risk of suicide include mental disorders , drug misuse , psychological states , cultural , family and social situations , and genetics .
Mental disorders and substance misuse frequently co-exist .
Other risk factors include having previously attempted suicide , the ready availability of a means to take one 's life , a family history of suicide , or the presence of traumatic brain injury .
For example , suicide rates have been found to be greater in households with firearms than those without them .
Its knowledge and uses spread from China through the Middle East to medieval Europe in the 13th century , where the first water powered paper mills were built .
Because of paper 's introduction to the West through the city of Baghdad , it was first called bagdatikos .
In the 19th century , industrial manufacture greatly lowered its cost , enabling mass exchange of information and contributing to significant cultural shifts .
In 1844 , the Canadian inventor Charles Fenerty and the German F. G. Keller independently developed processes for pulping wood fibres .
It is estimated that 25 -- 40 % of the protein in the diet of the approximately one million people living around the lake comes from lake fish .
Currently , there are around 100,000 people directly involved in the fisheries operating from almost 800 sites .
The lake is also vital to the estimated 10 million people living in the greater basin .
It therefore became essential for the Allied forces to gain control of the lake themselves .
Under the command of Lieutenant Commander Geoffrey Spicer-Simson the British Royal Navy achieved the monumental task of bringing two armed motor boats HMS Mimi and HMS Toutou from England to the lake by rail , road and river to Albertville -LRB- since renamed Kalemie in 1971 -RRB- on the western shore of Lake Tanganyika .
The two boats waited until December 1915 , and mounted a surprise attack on the Germans , with the capture of the gunboat Kingani .
Another German vessel , the Hedwig , was sunk in February 1916 , leaving the Götzen as the only German vessel remaining to control the lake .
The major river flowing into the lake is the Ruzizi River , formed about 10,000 years ago , which enters the north of the lake from Lake Kivu .
The Malagarasi River , which is Tanzania 's second largest river , enters the east side of Lake Tanganyika .
The Malagarasi is older than Lake Tanganyika and , before the lake was formed , directly drained into the Congo River .
Many species of cichlids from Lake Tanganyika , such as fish from the brightly coloured Tropheus genus , are popular fish among aquarium owners due to their bright colors .
Recreating a Lake Tanganyika biotope to host those cichlids in a habitat similar to their natural environment is also popular in the aquarium hobby .
Wary of foreign exploitation of the nation 's resources , Brazilian governments in the 1940s set out to develop the interior , away from the seaboard where foreigners owned large tracts of land .
The original architect of this expansion was President Getúlio Vargas , with the demand for rubber from the Allied forces in World War II providing funding for the drive .
Nkrumah read books about politics and divinity , and tutored students in philosophy .
In 1943 Nkrumah met Trinidadian Marxist C.L.R. James , Russian expatriate Raya Dunayevskaya , and Chinese-American Grace Lee Boggs , all of whom were members of an American-based Trotskyist intellectual cohort .
Nkrumah later credited James with teaching him `` how an underground movement worked '' .
Federal Bureau of Investigation files on Nkrumah , kept from January to May 1945 , identify him as a possible communist .
Nkrumah was determined to go to London , wanting to continue his education there now that the Second World War had ended .
James , in a 1945 letter introducing Nkrumah to Trinidad-born George Padmore in London , wrote : `` this young man is coming to you .
He is not very bright , but nevertheless do what you can for him because he 's determined to throw Europeans out of Africa . ''
The 1946 Gold Coast constitution gave Africans a majority on the Legislative Council for the first time .
Seen as a major step towards self-government , the new arrangement prompted the colony 's first true political party , founded in August 1947 , the United Gold Coast Convention -LRB- UGCC -RRB- .
The UGCC sought self-government as quickly as possible .
Since the leading members were all successful professionals , they needed to pay someone to run the party , and their choice fell on Nkrumah at the suggestion of Ako Adjei .
Nkrumah hesitated , realising the UGCC was controlled by conservative interests , but decided that the new post gave him huge political opportunities , and accepted .
After being questioned by British officials about his communist affiliations , Nkrumah boarded the MV Accra at Liverpool in November 1947 for the voyage home .
After brief stops in Sierra Leone , Liberia , and the Ivory Coast , he arrived in the Gold Coast , and after a brief stay and reunion with his mother in Tarkwa , began work at the party 's headquarters in Saltpond on 29 December 1947 .
Nkrumah quickly submitted plans for branches of the UGCC to be established colony-wide , and for strikes if necessary to gain political ends .
This activist stance divided the party 's governing committee , which was led by J.B. Danquah .
Nkrumah embarked on a tour to gain donations for the UGCC and establish new branches .
Nkrumah married Fathia Rizk , an Egyptian Coptic bank worker and former teacher , on the evening of her arrival in Ghana : New Year 's Eve , 1957 -- 1958 .
Fathia 's mother refused to bless their marriage , due to reluctance to see another of her children leave with a foreign husband .
As a married couple , the Nkrumah family had three children : Gamal -LRB- born 1959 -RRB- , Samia -LRB- born 1960 -RRB- and Sekou -LRB- born 1963 -RRB- .
The Navy 's flagship , and training ship , was the Achimota , a British yacht constructed during World War II .
In 1961 , the Navy ordered two 600-ton corvettes , the Keta and Kromantse from Vosper & Company and received them in 1967 .
Naval officers were trained at the Britannia Royal Naval College in Dartmouth .
The Ghanaian military budget rose each year , from $ 9.35 million -LRB- US dollars -RRB- in 1958 to $ 47 million in 1965 .
Known as the Father of Modern Karachi , mayor Seth Harchandrai Vishandas lead the municipal government to improve sanitary conditions in the Old City , as well as major infrastructure works in the New Town after his election in 1911 .
Despite communal violence across India and Pakistan , Karachi remained relatively peaceful compared to cities further north in Punjab .
The city became the focus for the resettlement of Muslim Muhajirs fleeing from the anti-Muslim pogroms in India , leading to a dramatic expansion of the city 's population , and which ultimately transformed its demographics and economy .
As home to Pakistan 's largest ports and a large portion of its manufacturing base , Karachi contributes a large share of Pakistan 's collected tax revenue .
As most of Pakistan 's large multinational corporations are based in Karachi , income taxes are paid in the city even though income may be generated from other parts of the country .
Approximately 25 % of Pakistan 's national revenue is generated in Karachi .
During the 1900s , Karachi saw its major beautification project under the mayoral administration of Harchandrai Vishandas .
New roads , parks , residential and recreational areas were developed as part of this project .
In 1948 , the Federal Capital Territory of Pakistan was created , comprising approximately 2,103 km2 -LRB- 812 sq mi -RRB- of Karachi and surrounding areas , but this was merged into the province of West Pakistan in 1961 .
In 1996 , the metropolitan area was divided into five districts , each with its own municipal corporation .
The ability to thrive solely on pasture -LRB- even without hay -RRB- varies with breed , but all sheep can survive on this diet .
Also included in some sheep 's diets are minerals , either in a trace mix or in licks .
Feed provided to sheep must be specially formulated , as most cattle , poultry , pig , and even some goat feeds contain levels of copper that are lethal to sheep .
The same danger applies to mineral supplements such as salt licks .
By selectively breeding ewes that produce multiple offspring with higher birth weights for generations , sheep producers have inadvertently caused some domestic sheep to have difficulty lambing ; balancing ease of lambing with high productivity is one of the dilemmas of sheep breeding .
In the case of any such problems , those present at lambing may assist the ewe by extracting or repositioning lambs .
After the birth , ewes ideally break the amniotic sac -LRB- if it is not broken during labor -RRB- , and begin licking clean the lamb .
Most lambs will begin standing within an hour of birth .
In normal situations , lambs nurse after standing , receiving vital colostrum milk .
Lambs that either fail to nurse or are rejected by the ewe require help to survive , such as bottle-feeding or fostering by another ewe .
Both external and internal parasites are the most prevalent malady in sheep , and are either fatal , or reduce the productivity of flocks .
Flies lay their eggs in wounds or wet , manure-soiled wool ; when the maggots hatch they burrow into a sheep 's flesh , eventually causing death if untreated .
In addition to other treatments , crutching -LRB- shearing wool from a sheep 's rump -RRB- is a common preventive method .
Some countries allow mulesing , a practice that involves stripping away the skin on the rump to prevent fly-strike , normally performed when the sheep is a lamb .
Nose bots are fly larvae that inhabit a sheep 's sinuses , causing breathing difficulties and discomfort .
External parasites may be controlled through the use of backliners , sprays or immersive sheep dips .
Oral anti-parasitic medicines , known as drenches , are given to a flock to treat worms , sometimes after worm eggs in the feces has been counted to assess infestation levels .
Afterwards , sheep may be moved to a new pasture to avoid ingesting the same parasites .
External sheep parasites include : lice -LRB- for different parts of the body -RRB- , sheep keds , nose bots , sheep itch mites , and maggots .
Keds are blood-sucking parasites that cause general malnutrition and decreased productivity , but are not fatal .
Fly maggots cause the extremely destructive condition of flystrike .
Sheep are generally too large and reproduce too slowly to make ideal research subjects , and thus are not a common model organism .
In particular , the Roslin Institute of Edinburgh , Scotland used sheep for genetics research that produced groundbreaking results .
In 1995 , two ewes named Megan and Morag were the first mammals cloned from differentiated cells .
A year later , a Finnish Dorset sheep named Dolly , dubbed `` the world 's most famous sheep '' in Scientific American , was the first mammal to be cloned from an adult somatic cell .
Following this , Polly and Molly were the first mammals to be simultaneously cloned and transgenic .
Domestic sheep are sometimes used in medical research , particularly for researching cardiovascular physiology , in areas such as hypertension and heart failure .
Pregnant sheep are also a useful model for human pregnancy , and have been used to investigate the effects on fetal development of malnutrition and hypoxia .
In behavioral sciences , sheep have been used in isolated cases for the study of facial recognition , as their mental process of recognition is qualitatively similar to humans .
Sheep have had a strong presence in many cultures , especially in areas where they form the most common type of livestock .
In the English language , to call someone a sheep or ovine may allude that they are timid and easily led .
In contradiction to this image , male sheep are often used as symbols of virility and power ; the logos of the Los Angeles Rams football team and the Dodge Ram pickup truck allude to males of the bighorn sheep , Ovis canadensis .
Radio broadcasting is a unidirectional wireless transmission over radio waves intended to reach a wide audience .
Stations can be linked in radio networks to broadcast a common radio format , either in broadcast syndication or simulcast or both .
The AM radio problem of interference at night was addressed in a different way .
At the time FM was set up , the available frequencies were far higher in the spectrum than those used for AM radio - by a factor of approximately 100 .
Moon reflections have been used in some experiments , but require impractical power levels .
Using these frequencies meant that even at far higher power , the range of a given FM signal was much shorter ; thus its market was more local than for AM radio .
The much larger bandwidths , compared to AM and SSB , are more susceptible to phase dispersion .
Higher frequencies do not reflect from the ionosphere , nor from storm clouds .
The common bile duct and the pancreatic duct enter the second part of the duodenum together at the hepatopancreatic ampulla , also known as the ampulla of Vater .
Damage to the liver is sometimes determined with a biopsy , particularly when the cause of liver damage is unknown .
In the 21st century they have been largely replaced by high-resolution radiographic scans .
The latter do not require ultrasound guidance , lab involvement , microscopic analysis , organ damage , pain , or patient sedation ; and the results are available immediately on a computer screen .
Most transplants are done for chronic liver diseases leading to cirrhosis , such as chronic hepatitis C , alcoholism , autoimmune hepatitis , and many others .
Less commonly , liver transplantation is done for fulminant hepatic failure , in which liver failure occurs over days to weeks .
In Plato , and in later physiology , the liver was thought to be the seat of the darkest emotions -LRB- specifically wrath , jealousy and greed -RRB- which drive men to action .
The Talmud -LRB- tractate Berakhot 61b -RRB- refers to the liver as the seat of anger , with the gallbladder counteracting this .
After founding the Empire and being proclaimed `` Genghis Khan '' , he started the Mongol invasions that conquered most of Eurasia .
Campaigns initiated in his lifetime include those against the Qara Khitai , Caucasus , and Khwarazmian , Western Xia and Jin dynasties .
These campaigns were often accompanied by large-scale massacres of the civilian populations -- especially in the Khwarazmian and Western Xia controlled lands .
By the end of his life , the Mongol Empire occupied a substantial portion of Central Asia and China .
One of the later ruptures between Temüjin and Toghrul was Toghrul 's refusal to give his daughter in marriage to Jochi , Temüjin 's first son .
This was disrespectful in Mongolian culture and led to a war .
Toghrul allied with Jamukha , who already opposed Temüjin 's forces .
However , the dispute between Toghrul and Jamukha , plus the desertion of a number of their allies to Temüjin , led to Toghrul 's defeat .
Jamukha escaped during the conflict .
The next direct threat to Temüjin was the Naimans -LRB- Naiman Mongols -RRB- , with whom Jamukha and his followers took refuge .
The Naimans did not surrender , although enough sectors again voluntarily sided with Temüjin .
In 1201 , a khuruldai elected Jamukha as Gür Khan , `` universal ruler '' , a title used by the rulers of the Qara Khitai .
Jamukha 's assumption of this title was the final breach with Temüjin , and Jamukha formed a coalition of tribes to oppose him .
Before the conflict , several generals abandoned Jamukha , including Subutai , Jelme 's well-known younger brother .
After several battles , Jamukha was turned over to Temüjin by his own men in 1206 .
Although known for the brutality of his campaigns and considered by many to have been a genocidal ruler , Genghis Khan is also credited with bringing the Silk Road under one cohesive political environment .
This brought communication and trade from Northeast Asia into Muslim Southwest Asia and Christian Europe , thus expanding the horizons of all three cultural areas .
One theory suggests the name stems from a palatalised version of the Mongolian and Turkic word tenggis , meaning `` ocean '' , `` oceanic '' or `` wide-spreading '' .
-LRB- Lake Baikal and ocean were called tenggis by the Mongols .
Zhèng -LRB- Chinese : 正 -RRB- meaning `` right '' , `` just '' , or `` true '' , would have received the Mongolian adjectival modifier - s , creating `` Jenggis '' , which in medieval romanization would be written `` Genghis '' .
It is likely that the 13th century Mongolian pronunciation would have closely matched `` Chinggis '' .
Byron fell in love with Mary Chaworth , whom he met while at school , and she was the reason he refused to return to Harrow in September 1803 .
His mother wrote , `` He has no indisposition that I know of but love , desperate love , the worst of all maladies in my opinion .
In Byron 's later memoirs , `` Mary Chaworth is portrayed as the first object of his adult sexual feelings . ''
Byron made his way to Smyrna , where he and Hobhouse cadged a ride to Constantinople on HMS Salsette .
While Salsette was anchored awaiting Ottoman permission to dock at the city , on 3 May 1810 Byron and Lieutenant Ekenhead , of Salsette 's Marines , swam the Hellespont .
Byron commemorated this feat in the second canto of Don Juan .
Eventually Byron began to court Lady Caroline 's cousin Anne Isabella Milbanke -LRB- `` Annabella '' -RRB- , who refused his first proposal of marriage but later accepted him .
The first recorded notable example of open water swimming took place on 3 May 1810 when Lord Byron swam from Europe to Asia across the Hellespont Strait .
This is often seen as the birth of the sport and pastime , and to commemorate it , the event is recreated every year as an open water swimming event .
Pregnancy is typically broken into three periods , or trimesters , each of about three months .
Each trimester is defined as 14 weeks , for a total duration of 42 weeks , although the average duration of pregnancy is 40 weeks .
While there are no hard and fast rules , these distinctions are useful in describing the changes that take place over time .
Although the fetus begins to move during the first trimester , it is not until the second trimester that movement , often referred to as `` quickening '' , can be felt .
This typically happens in the fourth month , more specifically in the 20th to 21st week , or by the 19th week if the woman has been pregnant before .
It is common for some women not to feel the fetus move until much later .
During the second trimester , most women begin to wear maternity clothes .
One scientific term for the state of pregnancy is gravidity -LRB- adjective `` gravid '' -RRB- , Latin for `` heavy '' and a pregnant female is sometimes referred to as a gravida .
Similarly , the term parity -LRB- abbreviated as `` para '' -RRB- is used for the number of times a female carries a pregnancy past 20 weeks of gestation .
Twins and other multiple births are counted as one pregnancy and birth .
A woman who has never been pregnant is referred to as a nulligravida .
A woman who is -LRB- or has been only -RRB- pregnant for the first time is referred to as a primigravida , and a woman in subsequent pregnancies as a multigravida or as multiparous .
Therefore , during a second pregnancy a woman would be described as gravida 2 , para 1 and upon live delivery as gravida 2 , para 2 .
In-progress pregnancies , abortions , miscarriages and / or stillbirths account for parity values being less than the gravida number .
In the case of twins , triplets , etc. , gravida number and parity value are increased by one only .
Women who have never carried a pregnancy achieving more than 20 weeks of gestation age are referred to as nulliparous .
Regular aerobic exercise during pregnancy appears to improve -LRB- or maintain -RRB- physical fitness .
Physical exercise during pregnancy does appear to decrease the risk of C-section .
Bed rest , outside of research studies , is not recommended as there is no evidence of benefit and potential harm .
Risks for the child include miscarriage , growth restriction , growth acceleration , fetal obesity -LRB- macrosomia -RRB- , polyhydramnios -LRB- too much amniotic fluid -RRB- , and birth defects .
Without the institutions of the Roman empire that had supported its uniformity , medieval Latin lost its linguistic cohesion : for example , in classical Latin sum and eram are used as auxiliary verbs in the perfect and pluperfect passive , which are compound tenses .
Medieval Latin might use fui and fueram instead .
Furthermore , the meanings of many words have been changed and new vocabularies have been introduced from the vernacular .
Therefore , until the end of the 17th century the majority of books and almost all diplomatic documents were written in Latin .
Afterwards , most diplomatic documents were written in French and later just native or other languages .
The sequences sometimes did not represent diphthongs .
For example , amābit , `` he or she or it will love '' , is formed from the same stem , amā - , to which a future tense marker , - bi - , is suffixed , and a third person singular marker , - t , is suffixed .
There is an inherent ambiguity : - t may denote more than one grammatical category : masculine , feminine , or neuter gender .
A major task in understanding Latin phrases and clauses is to clarify such ambiguities by an analysis of context .
All natural languages contain ambiguities of one sort or another .
Nominative -- used when the noun is the subject or a predicate nominative .
Accusative -- used when the noun is the direct object of the subject and as the object of a preposition demonstrating place to which. : The man killed the boy .
Verbs are described by four principal parts :
Carrying out the exponentiation can be done efficiently , but the discrete logarithm is believed to be very hard to calculate in some groups .
This asymmetry has important applications in public key cryptography , such as for example in the Diffie -- Hellman key exchange , a routine that allows secure exchanges of cryptographic keys over unsecured information channels .
Zech 's logarithm is related to the discrete logarithm in the multiplicative group of non-zero elements of a finite field .
Logarithms are easy to compute in some cases , such as log10 -LRB- 1000 -RRB- = 3 .
In general , logarithms can be calculated using power series or the arithmetic -- geometric mean , or be retrieved from a precalculated logarithm table that provides a fixed precision .
Newton 's method , an iterative method to solve equations approximately , can also be used to calculate the logarithm , because its inverse function , the exponential function , can be computed efficiently .
Using look-up tables , CORDIC-like methods can be used to compute logarithms if the only available operations are addition and bit shifts .
Moreover , the binary logarithm algorithm calculates lb -LRB- x -RRB- recursively based on repeated squarings of x , taking advantage of the relation
The better the initial approximation y is , the closer A is to 1 , so its logarithm can be calculated efficiently .
A can be calculated using the exponential series , which converges quickly provided y is not too large .
Calculating the logarithm of larger z can be reduced to smaller values of z by writing z = a · 10b , so that ln -LRB- z -RRB- = ln -LRB- a -RRB- + b · ln -LRB- 10 -RRB- .
In the same way as the logarithm reverses exponentiation , the complex logarithm is the inverse function of the exponential function applied to complex numbers .
While at Los Alamos National Laboratory working on the Manhattan Project , Richard Feynman developed a bit processing algorithm that is similar to long division and was later used in the Connection Machine .
The algorithm uses the fact that every real number
in the sense that the ratio of π -LRB- x -RRB- and that fraction approaches 1 when x tends to infinity .
As a consequence , the probability that a randomly chosen number between 1 and x is prime is inversely proportional to the number of decimal digits of x .
A far better estimate of π -LRB- x -RRB- is given by the offset logarithmic integral function Li -LRB- x -RRB- , defined by
In St. Petersburg on 18 September 1783 , after a lunch with his family , Euler was discussing the newly discovered planet Uranus and its orbit with a fellow academician Anders Johan Lexell , when he collapsed from a brain hemorrhage .
Jacob von Staehlin-Storcksburg wrote a short obituary for the Russian Academy of Sciences and Russian mathematician Nicolas Fuss , one of Euler 's disciples , wrote a more detailed eulogy which he delivered at a memorial meeting .
In his eulogy for the French Academy , French mathematician and philosopher Marquis de Condorcet , wrote :
Euler linked the nature of prime distribution with ideas in analysis .
In doing so , he discovered the connection between the Riemann zeta function and the prime numbers ; this is known as the Euler product formula for the Riemann zeta function .
Newton 's corpuscular theory implied that light would travel faster in a denser medium , while the wave theory of Huygens and others implied the opposite .
At that time , the speed of light could not be measured accurately enough to decide which theory was correct .
The first to make a sufficiently accurate measurement was Léon Foucault , in 1850 .
His result supported the wave theory , and the classical particle theory was finally abandoned , only to partly re-emerge in the 20th century .
Antibiotics , also called antibacterials , are a type of antimicrobial drug used in the treatment and prevention of bacterial infections .
A limited number of antibiotics also possess antiprotozoal activity .
Antibiotics are not effective against viruses such as the common cold or influenza , and their inappropriate use allows the emergence of resistant organisms .
Drugs which inhibit viruses are termed antiviral drugs or antivirals rather than antibiotics .
Antibiotics are used to treat or prevent bacterial infections , and sometimes protozoan infections .
When an infection is suspected of being responsible for an illness but the responsible pathogen has not been identified , an empiric therapy is adopted .
This involves the administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic based on the signs and symptoms presented and is initiated pending laboratory results that can take several days .
Sometimes the term antibiotic -LRB- which means `` opposing life '' -RRB- is used to refer to any substance used against microbes , synonymous with antimicrobial .
Some sources distinguish between antibacterial and antibiotic ; antibacterials are used in soaps and disinfectants , while antibiotics are used as medicine .
These include , for example , the beta-lactam antibiotics , which include the penicillins -LRB- produced by fungi in the genus Penicillium -RRB- , the cephalosporins , and the carbapenems .
The term ` antibiosis ' , meaning `` against life '' , was introduced by the French bacteriologist Jean Paul Vuillemin as a descriptive name of the phenomenon exhibited by these early antibacterial drugs .
Antibiosis was first described in 1877 in bacteria when Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch observed that an airborne bacillus could inhibit the growth of Bacillus anthracis .
These drugs were later renamed antibiotics by Selman Waksman , an American microbiologist , in 1942 .
Phage therapy is another method for treating antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria .
Phage therapy infects pathogenic bacteria with their own viruses , bacteriophages and their host ranges are extremely specific for certain bacteria , thus they do not disturb the host organism and intestinal microflora unlike antibiotics .
Bacteriophages , also known simply as phages , infect and can kill bacteria and affect bacterial growth primarily during lytic cycles .
Phages insert their DNA into the bacterium , where it is transcribed and used to make new phages , after which the cell will lyse , releasing new phage able to infect and destroy further bacteria of the same strain .
The high specificity of phage protects `` good '' bacteria from destruction .
Bacteriophages may harbour virulence factors or toxic genes in their genomes and identification of genes with similarity to known virulence factors or toxins by genomic sequencing may be prudent prior to use .
In addition , the oral and IV administration of phages for the eradication of bacterial infections poses a much higher safety risk than topical application , and there is the additional concern of uncertain immune responses to these large antigenic cocktails .
There are considerable regulatory hurdles that must be cleared for such therapies .
The use of bacteriophages as a replacement for antimicrobial agents against MDR pathogens no longer respond to conventional antibiotics remains an attractive option despite numerous challenges .
Florentine court records of 1476 show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy but acquitted ; homosexual acts were illegal in Renaissance Florence .
One writer , the `` Anonimo '' Gaddiano , claims that in 1480 Leonardo was living with the Medici and working in the Garden of the Piazza San Marco in Florence , a Neo-Platonic academy of artists , poets and philosophers that the Medici had established .
Neither commission was completed , the second being interrupted when Leonardo went to Milan .
In 1506 Leonardo returned to Milan .
Many of his most prominent pupils or followers in painting either knew or worked with him in Milan , including Bernardino Luini , Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio and Marco d'Oggiono .
At this time he may have commenced a project for an equestrian figure of Charles II d'Amboise , the acting French governor of Milan .
Many historians and scholars regard Leonardo as the prime exemplar of the `` Universal Genius '' or `` Renaissance Man '' , an individual of `` unquenchable curiosity '' and `` feverishly inventive imagination '' .
Marco Rosci notes that while there is much speculation regarding his life and personality , his view of the world was logical rather than mysterious , and that the empirical methods he employed were unorthodox for his time .
One of these paintings was St. Jerome in the Wilderness , which Bortolon associates with a difficult period of Leonardo 's life , as evidenced in his diary : `` I thought I was learning to live ; I was only learning to die . ''
Jerome , as a penitent , occupies the middle of the picture , set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above .
His kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape , with one arm stretched to the outer edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction .
J. Wasserman points out the link between this painting and Leonardo 's anatomical studies .
Across the foreground sprawls his symbol , a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space .
The other remarkable feature is the sketchy landscape of craggy rocks against which the figure is silhouetted .
Leonardo started his study in the anatomy of the human body under the apprenticeship of Andrea del Verrocchio , who demanded that his students develop a deep knowledge of the subject .
As an artist , he quickly became master of topographic anatomy , drawing many studies of muscles , tendons and other visible anatomical features .
As a successful artist , Leonardo was given permission to dissect human corpses at the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence and later at hospitals in Milan and Rome .
Leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 13,000 words towards a treatise on anatomy .
These papers were left to his heir , Francesco Melzi , for publication , a task of overwhelming difficulty because of its scope and Leonardo 's idiosyncratic writing .
The project was left incomplete at the time of Melzi 's death more than 50 years later , with only a small amount of the material on anatomy included in Leonardo 's Treatise on painting , published in France in 1632 .
During the time that Melzi was ordering the material into chapters for publication , they were examined by a number of anatomists and artists , including Vasari , Cellini and Albrecht Dürer , who made a number of drawings from them .
The abbreviation cc -LRB- for cubic centimetre , equal to a millilitre or mL -RRB- is a unit of the cgs system , that preceded the MKS system , that later evolved into the SI system .
The abbreviation cc is still commonly used in many fields including medical dosage and sizing for small combustion engine displacement , such as those used in motorcycles .
Although kilolitres , megalitres , and gigalitres are commonly used for measuring water consumption , reservoir capacities and river flows , for larger volumes of fluids , such as annual consumption of tap water , lorry -LRB- truck -RRB- tanks , or swimming pools , the cubic metre is the general unit .
The Los Angeles Sentinel is the city 's major African-American weekly paper , boasting the largest African-American readership in the Western United States .
Investor 's Business Daily is distributed from its L.A. corporate offices , which are headquartered in Playa del Rey .
There are also a number of smaller regional newspapers , alternative weeklies and magazines , including the Los Angeles Register , Los Angeles Community News , -LRB- which focuses on coverage of the greater Los Angeles area -RRB- , Los Angeles Daily News -LRB- which focuses coverage on the San Fernando Valley -RRB- , LA Weekly , L.A. Record -LRB- which focuses coverage on the music scene in the Greater Los Angeles Area -RRB- , Los Angeles Magazine , the Los Angeles Business Journal , the Los Angeles Daily Journal -LRB- legal industry paper -RRB- , The Hollywood Reporter , Variety -LRB- both entertainment industry papers -RRB- , and Los Angeles Downtown News .
In addition to the major papers , numerous local periodicals serve immigrant communities in their native languages , including Armenian , English , Korean , Persian , Russian , Chinese , Japanese , Hebrew , and Arabic .
Examples include The Daily Breeze -LRB- serving the South Bay -RRB- , and The Long Beach Press-Telegram .
Because `` Their economic value merely represents the power of one class to appropriate the earnings of another . ''
and `` their increase or decrease does not affect the sum of wealth in the community '' .
Capital is distinct from land -LRB- or non-renewable resources -RRB- in that capital can be increased by human labor .
At any given moment in time , total physical capital may be referred to as the capital stock -LRB- which is not to be confused with the capital stock of a business entity -RRB- .
Classical and neoclassical economics regard capital as one of the factors of production -LRB- alongside the other factors : land and labour -RRB- .
All other inputs to production are called intangibles in classical economics .
This includes organization , entrepreneurship , knowledge , goodwill , or management -LRB- which some characterize as talent , social capital or instructional capital -RRB- .
Earlier illustrations often described capital as physical items , such as tools , buildings , and vehicles that are used in the production process .
Since at least the 1960s economists have increasingly focused on broader forms of capital .
For example , investment in skills and education can be viewed as building up human capital or knowledge capital , and investments in intellectual property can be viewed as building up intellectual capital .
These terms lead to certain questions and controversies discussed in those articles .
In 1751 , Smith earned a professorship at Glasgow University teaching logic courses , and in 1752 he was elected a member of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh , having been introduced to the society by Lord Kames .
When the head of Moral Philosophy in Glasgow died the next year , Smith took over the position .
Some scholars have perceived a conflict between The Theory of Moral Sentiments and The Wealth of Nations ; the former emphasises sympathy for others , while the latter focuses on the role of self-interest .
In recent years , however , some scholars of Smith 's work have argued that no contradiction exists .
They claim that in The Theory of Moral Sentiments , Smith develops a theory of psychology in which individuals seek the approval of the `` impartial spectator '' as a result of a natural desire to have outside observers sympathise with their sentiments .
Rather than viewing The Theory of Moral Sentiments and The Wealth of Nations as presenting incompatible views of human nature , some Smith scholars regard the works as emphasising different aspects of human nature that vary depending on the situation .
Otteson argues that both books are Newtonian in their methodology and deploy a similar `` market model '' for explaining the creation and development of large-scale human social orders , including morality , economics , as well as language .
Ekelund and Hebert offer a differing view , observing that self-interest is present in both works and that `` in the former , sympathy is the moral faculty that holds self-interest in check , whereas in the latter , competition is the economic faculty that restrains self-interest . ''
Other writers have argued that Smith 's support for laissez-faire -LRB- which in French means leave alone -RRB- has been overstated .
Herbert Stein wrote that the people who `` wear an Adam Smith necktie '' do it to `` make a statement of their devotion to the idea of free markets and limited government '' , and that this misrepresents Smith 's ideas .
Stein writes that Smith `` was not pure or doctrinaire about this idea .
He viewed government intervention in the market with great skepticism ... yet he was prepared to accept or propose qualifications to that policy in the specific cases where he judged that their net effect would be beneficial and would not undermine the basically free character of the system .
In Stein 's reading , The Wealth of Nations could justify the Food and Drug Administration , the Consumer Product Safety Commission , mandatory employer health benefits , environmentalism , and `` discriminatory taxation to deter improper or luxurious behavior '' .
Throughout his riverboat experience , Armstrong 's musicianship began to mature and expand .
In 1922 , Armstrong joined the exodus to Chicago , where he had been invited by his mentor , Joe `` King '' Oliver , to join his Creole Jazz Band and where he could make a sufficient income so that he no longer needed to supplement his music with day labor jobs .
It was a boom time in Chicago and though race relations were poor , the city was teeming with jobs available for black people , who were making good wages in factories and had plenty to spend on entertainment .
During the subsequent 30 years , Armstrong played more than 300 gigs a year .
Bookings for big bands tapered off during the 1940s due to changes in public tastes : ballrooms closed , and there was competition from television and from other types of music becoming more popular than big band music .
Armstrong 's marriages never produced any offspring , though he loved children .
However , in December 2012 , 57-year-old Sharon Preston-Folta claimed to be his daughter from a 1950s affair between Armstrong and Lucille `` Sweets '' Preston , a dancer at the Cotton Club .
In a 1955 letter to his manager , Joe Glaser , Armstrong affirmed his belief that Preston 's newborn baby was his daughter , and ordered Glaser to pay a monthly allowance of $ 400 to mother and child .
Armstrong was largely accepted into white society , both on stage and off , a privilege reserved for very few African-American public figures , and usually those of either exceptional talent or fair skin tone .
Often , Armstrong re-composed pop-tunes he played , simply with variations that made them more compelling to jazz listeners of the era .
At the same time , however , his oeuvre includes many original melodies , creative leaps , and relaxed or driving rhythms .
Armstrong 's playing technique , honed by constant practice , extended the range , tone and capabilities of the trumpet .
In his records , Armstrong almost single-handedly created the role of the jazz soloist , taking what had been essentially a collective folk music and turning it into an art form with tremendous possibilities for individual expression .
Later , he played in brass bands and riverboats of New Orleans , and began traveling with the well-regarded band of Fate Marable , which toured on a steamboat up and down the Mississippi River .
He described his time with Marable as `` going to the University , '' since it gave him a much wider experience working with written arrangements .
Others take a systemic viewpoint that does not necessarily depend on molecular chemistry .
Variations of this definition include Stuart Kauffman 's definition as an autonomous agent or a multi-agent system capable of reproducing itself or themselves , and of completing at least one thermodynamic work cycle .
This definition is extended by the apparition of novel functions over time .
Whether or not viruses should be considered as alive is controversial .
However , viruses do not metabolize and they require a host cell to make new products .
Virus self-assembly within host cells has implications for the study of the origin of life , as it may support the hypothesis that life could have started as self-assembling organic molecules .
Life on Earth first appeared as early as 4.28 billion years ago , soon after ocean formation 4.41 billion years ago , and not long after the formation of the Earth 4.54 billion years ago .
Earth 's current life may have descended from an RNA world , although RNA-based life may not have been the first .
The mechanism by which life began on Earth is unknown , though many hypotheses have been formulated and are often based on the Miller -- Urey experiment .
In July 2016 , scientists reported identifying a set of 355 genes believed to be present in the last universal common ancestor -LRB- LUCA -RRB- of all living organisms .
For most of its existence , Earth 's habitable environment has been dominated by microorganisms and subjected to their metabolism and evolution .
As a consequence of these microbial activities , the physical-chemical environment on Earth has been changing on a geologic time scale , thereby affecting the path of evolution of subsequent life .
For example , the release of molecular oxygen by cyanobacteria as a by-product of photosynthesis induced global changes in the Earth 's environment .
Because oxygen was toxic to most life on Earth at the time , this posed novel evolutionary challenges , and ultimately resulted in the formation of Earth 's major animal and plant species .
In most ecosystems , the conditions vary during the day and from one season to the next .
To live in most ecosystems , then , organisms must be able to survive a range of conditions , called the `` range of tolerance . ''
Organisms that have a wide range of tolerance are more widely distributed than organisms with a narrow range of tolerance .
It is a challenge for scientists and philosophers to define life .
Any definition must be general enough to both encompass all known life and any unknown life that may be different from life on Earth .
The first known attempt to classify organisms was conducted by the Greek philosopher Aristotle -LRB- 384 -- 322 BC -RRB- , who classified all living organisms known at that time as either a plant or an animal , based mainly on their ability to move .
He also distinguished animals with blood from animals without blood -LRB- or at least without red blood -RRB- , which can be compared with the concepts of vertebrates and invertebrates respectively , and divided the blooded animals into five groups : viviparous quadrupeds -LRB- mammals -RRB- , oviparous quadrupeds -LRB- reptiles and amphibians -RRB- , birds , fishes and whales .
The bloodless animals were also divided into five groups : cephalopods , crustaceans , insects -LRB- which included the spiders , scorpions , and centipedes , in addition to what we define as insects today -RRB- , shelled animals -LRB- such as most molluscs and echinoderms -RRB- , and `` zoophytes '' -LRB- animals that resemble plants -RRB- .
Though Aristotle 's work in zoology was not without errors , it was the grandest biological synthesis of the time and remained the ultimate authority for many centuries after his death .
The exploration of the Americas revealed large numbers of new plants and animals that needed descriptions and classification .
In the latter part of the 16th century and the beginning of the 17th , careful study of animals commenced and was gradually extended until it formed a sufficient body of knowledge to serve as an anatomical basis for classification .
In the late 1740s , Carl Linnaeus introduced his system of binomial nomenclature for the classification of species .
Linnaeus attempted to improve the composition and reduce the length of the previously used many-worded names by abolishing unnecessary rhetoric , introducing new descriptive terms and precisely defining their meaning .
Prokaryotes lack a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles , although they have circular DNA and ribosomes .
The other primary type of cells are the eukaryotes , which have distinct nuclei bound by a nuclear membrane and membrane-bound organelles , including mitochondria , chloroplasts , lysosomes , rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum , and vacuoles .
In addition , they possess organized chromosomes that store genetic material .
All species of large complex organisms are eukaryotes , including animals , plants and fungi , though most species of eukaryote are protist microorganisms .
The conventional model is that eukaryotes evolved from prokaryotes , with the main organelles of the eukaryotes forming through endosymbiosis between bacteria and the progenitor eukaryotic cell .
Cells reproduce through a process of cell division in which the parent cell divides into two or more daughter cells .
For prokaryotes , cell division occurs through a process of fission in which the DNA is replicated , then the two copies are attached to parts of the cell membrane .
In eukaryotes , a more complex process of mitosis is followed .
Cells have evolved methods to perceive and respond to their microenvironment , thereby enhancing their adaptability .
Cell signaling coordinates cellular activities , and hence governs the basic functions of multicellular organisms .
Signaling between cells can occur through direct cell contact using juxtacrine signalling , or indirectly through the exchange of agents as in the endocrine system .
In more complex organisms , coordination of activities can occur through a dedicated nervous system .
Synthetic biology is a new area of biotechnology that combines science and biological engineering .
Synthetic biology includes the broad redefinition and expansion of biotechnology , with the ultimate goals of being able to design and build engineered biological systems that process information , manipulate chemicals , fabricate materials and structures , produce energy , provide food , and maintain and enhance human health and the environment .
Techniques from linear algebra are also used in analytic geometry , engineering , physics , natural sciences , computer science , computer animation , advanced facial recognition algorithms and the social sciences -LRB- particularly in economics -RRB- .
Because linear algebra is such a well-developed theory , nonlinear mathematical models are sometimes approximated by linear models .
Quantum mechanics is highly inspired by notions in linear algebra .
In quantum mechanics , the physical state of a particle is represented by a vector , and observables -LRB- such as momentum , energy , and angular momentum -RRB- are represented by linear operators on the underlying vector space .
More concretely , the wave function of a particle describes its physical state and lies in the vector space L2 -LRB- the functions φ : R3 → C such that
When formulated using vectors and matrices the geometry of points and lines in the plane can be extended to the geometry of points and hyperplanes in high-dimensional spaces .
Homogeneous coordinates identify the plane E with the z = 1 plane in three dimensional space .
The x − y coordinates in E are obtained from homogeneous coordinates y = -LRB- y1 , y2 , y3 -RRB- by dividing by the third component -LRB- if it is nonzero -RRB- to obtain y = -LRB- y1/y3 , y2/y3 , 1 -RRB- .
A large part of Archimedes ' work in engineering arose from fulfilling the needs of his home city of Syracuse .
The Greek writer Athenaeus of Naucratis described how King Hiero II commissioned Archimedes to design a huge ship , the Syracusia , which could be used for luxury travel , carrying supplies , and as a naval warship .
The Syracusia is said to have been the largest ship built in classical antiquity .
According to Athenaeus , it was capable of carrying 600 people and included garden decorations , a gymnasium and a temple dedicated to the goddess Aphrodite among its facilities .
Since a ship of this size would leak a considerable amount of water through the hull , the Archimedes ' screw was purportedly developed in order to remove the bilge water .
It was turned by hand , and could also be used to transfer water from a low-lying body of water into irrigation canals .
The Archimedes ' screw described in Roman times by Vitruvius may have been an improvement on a screw pump that was used to irrigate the Hanging Gardens of Babylon .
The world 's first seagoing steamship with a screw propeller was the SS Archimedes , which was launched in 1839 and named in honor of Archimedes and his work on the screw .
Other mathematical achievements include deriving an accurate approximation of pi , defining and investigating the spiral bearing his name , and creating a system using exponentiation for expressing very large numbers .
He is credited with designing innovative machines , such as his screw pump , compound pulleys , and defensive war machines to protect his native Syracuse from invasion .
Archimedes died during the Siege of Syracuse when he was killed by a Roman soldier despite orders that he should not be harmed .
Cicero describes visiting the tomb of Archimedes , which was surmounted by a sphere and a cylinder , which Archimedes had requested to be placed on his tomb , representing his mathematical discoveries .
In this work Archimedes explains the Law of the Lever , stating , `` Magnitudes are in equilibrium at distances reciprocally proportional to their weights . ''
The scholars T. L. Heath and Marshall Clagett argued that it can not have been written by Archimedes in its current form , since it quotes Archimedes , suggesting modification by another author .
The Lemmas may be based on an earlier work by Archimedes that is now lost .
Other genres under study by academia include critical literacy , media literacy , ecological literacy and health literacy With the increasing emphasis on evidence-based decision making , and the use of statistical graphics and information , statistical literacy is becoming a very important aspect of literacy in general .
The International Statistical Literacy Project is dedicated to the promotion of statistical literacy among all members of society .
There are any number of approaches to teaching literacy ; each is shaped by its informing assumptions about what literacy is and how it is best learned by students .
Phonics instruction , for example , focuses on reading at the level of the word .
It teaches readers to observe and interpret the letters or groups of letters that make up words .
A common method of teaching phonics is synthetic phonics , in which a novice reader pronounces each individual sound and `` blends '' them to pronounce the whole word .
Another approach is embedded phonics instruction , used more often in whole language reading instruction , in which novice readers learn about the individual letters in words on a just-in-time , just-in-place basis that is tailored to meet each student 's reading and writing learning needs .
That is , teachers provide phonics instruction opportunistically , within the context of stories or student writing that feature many instances of a particular letter or group of letters .
Embedded instruction combines letter-sound knowledge with the use of meaningful context to read new and difficult words .
Techniques such as directed listening and thinking activities can be used to aid children in learning how to read and reading comprehension .
In the 19th century , everything about print changed , and literature in its many forms became much more available .
But educating the Canadian population in reading and writing was nevertheless a huge challenge .
Concerned about the strong French Canadian presence in the colony , the British authorities repeatedly tried to help establish schools that were outside the control of religious authorities , but these efforts were largely undermined by the Catholic Church and later the Anglican clergy .
Despite this , the invention of the printing press had laid the foundation for the modern era and universal social literacy , and so it is that with time , `` technologically , literacy had passed from the hands of an elite to the populace at large .
Historical factors and sociopolitical conditions , however , have determined the extent to which universal social literacy has come to pass '' .
In 1964 in Brazil , Paulo Freire was arrested and exiled for teaching peasants to read .
Since democracy returned to Brazil , however , there has been a steady increase in the percentage of literate people .
Educators with the Axé project within the city of Salvador Bahía attempt to improve literacy rates among urban youth , especially youth living on the streets , through the use of music and dances of the local culture .
The PRC conducts standardized testing to assess proficiency in Standard Chinese , known as `` putonghua , '' but it is primarily for foreigners or those needing to demonstrate professional proficiency in the Beijing dialect .
Literacy in languages like Chinese can be assessed by reading comprehension tests , just as in other languages , but historically has often been graded on the number of Chinese characters introduced during the speaker 's schooling , with a few thousand considered the minimum for practical literacy .
Social science surveys in China have repeatedly found that just more than half the population of China is conversant in spoken putonghua .
Considering the `` color-of-the-shape '' function above , the set X is the domain consisting of the four shapes , while Y is the codomain consisting of five colors .
There are many ways to describe or represent a function .
Some functions may be defined by a formula or algorithm that tells how to compute the output for a given input .
Others are given by a picture , called the graph of the function .
In science , functions are sometimes defined by a table that gives the outputs for selected inputs .
A function could be described implicitly , for example as the inverse to another function or as a solution of a differential equation .
In modern mathematics , a function is defined by its set of inputs , called the domain ; a set containing the set of outputs , and possibly additional elements , as members , called its codomain ; and the set of all input-output pairs , called its graph .
Sometimes the codomain is called the function 's `` range '' , but more commonly the word `` range '' is used to mean , instead , specifically the set of outputs -LRB- this is also called the image of the function -RRB- .
For example , we could define a function using the rule f -LRB- x -RRB- = x2 by saying that the domain and codomain are the real numbers , and that the graph consists of all pairs of real numbers -LRB- x , x2 -RRB- .
Collections of functions with the same domain and the same codomain are called function spaces , the properties of which are studied in such mathematical disciplines as real analysis , complex analysis , and functional analysis .
In some parts of mathematics , including recursion theory and functional analysis , it is convenient to study partial functions in which some values of the domain have no association in the graph ; i.e. , single-valued relations .
For example , the function f such that f -LRB- x -RRB- = 1/x does not define a value for x = 0 , since division by zero is not defined .
The term total function can be used to stress the fact that every element of the domain does appear as the first element of an ordered pair in the graph .
Louis used court ritual and the arts to validate and augment his control over France .
With his support , Colbert established from the beginning of Louis ' personal reign a centralised and institutionalised system for creating and perpetuating the royal image .
The King was thus portrayed largely in majesty or at war , notably against Spain .
This portrayal of the monarch was to be found in numerous media of artistic expression , such as painting , sculpture , theatre , dance , music , and the almanacs that diffused royal propaganda to the population at large .
The depiction of the king in this manner focused on allegorical or mythological attributes , instead of attempting to produce a true likeness .
There is no better illustration of this than in Hyacinthe Rigaud 's frequently-reproduced Portrait of Louis XIV of 1701 , in which a 63-year-old Louis appears to stand on a set of unnaturally young legs .
The best example of Anne 's statesmanship and the partial change in her heart towards her native Spain is seen in her keeping of one of Richelieu 's men , the Chancellor of France Pierre Séguier , in his post .
Séguier was the person who had interrogated Anne in 1637 , treating her like a `` common criminal '' as she described her treatment following the discovery that she was giving military secrets and information to Spain .
Anne was virtually under house arrest for a number of years during her husband 's rule , and was physically searched and almost insulted by the chancellor according to certain sources .
By keeping him in his post , Anne was giving a sign that the interests of France and her son Louis were the guiding spirit of all her political and legal actions .
Louis XIV was declared to have reached the age of majority in 7 September 1651 .
On the death of Mazarin , in March 1661 , Louis assumed personal control of the reins of government and astonished his court by declaring that he would rule without a chief minister : `` Up to this moment I have been pleased to entrust the government of my affairs to the late Cardinal .
I request and order you to seal no orders except by my command ... I order you not to sign anything , not even a passport ... without my command ; to render account to me personally each day and to favor no one '' .
Louis was able to capitalize on the widespread public yearning for law and order , that resulted from prolonged foreign wars and domestic civil strife , to further consolidate central political authority and reform at the expense of the feudal aristocracy .
Praising his ability to choose and encourage men of talent , the historian Chateaubriand noted : `` it is the voice of genius of all kinds which sounds from the tomb of Louis '' .
One of Louis ' more infamous decrees was the Grande Ordonnance sur les Colonies of 1685 , also known as the Code Noir -LRB- `` black code '' -RRB- .
Additionally , in the colonies , only Roman Catholics could own slaves , and these had to be baptised .
During Louis ' reign , France was the leading European power , and it fought three major wars : the Franco-Dutch War , the War of the League of Augsburg , and the War of the Spanish Succession .
Warfare defined Louis XIV 's foreign policies , and his personality shaped his approach .
Impelled `` by a mix of commerce , revenge , and pique , '' Louis sensed that warfare was the ideal way to enhance his glory .
He taught his diplomats their job was to create tactical and strategic advantages for the French military .
The conclusion of a general peace permitted Louis to intervene in the Scanian War in 1679 , on behalf of his ally Sweden .
He forced Brandenburg-Prussia to the peace table at the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye , and imposed peace on Denmark-Norway by the Treaty of Fontainebleau and the Peace of Lund , all concluded in 1679 .
From farther afield , Siam dispatched an embassy in 1684 , reciprocated by the French magnificently the next year under Alexandre , Chevalier de Chaumont .
This , in turn , was succeeded by another Siamese embassy under Kosa Pan , superbly received at Versailles in 1686 .
Louis then sent another embassy in 1687 , under Simon de la Loubère , and French influence grew at the Siamese court , which granted Mergui as a naval base to France .
However , the death of Narai , King of Ayutthaya , the execution of his pro-French minister Constantine Phaulkon , and the Siege of Bangkok in 1688 ended this era of French influence .
In 1668 the king of Portugal sent an elephant from the kingdom of Congo to the king of France .
The elephant lived in the menagerie at Versailles for thirteen years and only grew a further foot , no doubt because the change in climate and food had stunted its growth ; so it measured just seven and a half feet when the gentlemen of the Royal Academy of Sciences carried out their description of it .
The treaty yielded many benefits for France .
Louis secured permanent French sovereignty over all of Alsace , including Strasbourg , and established the Rhine as the Franco-German border -LRB- which persists to this day -RRB- .
Pondichéry and Acadia were returned to France , and Louis ' de facto possession of Saint-Domingue was recognised as lawful .
Louis proved relatively more faithful to his second wife , Françoise d'Aubigné , Marquise de Maintenon .
The king was , at first , put off by her strict religious practice , but he warmed to her through her care for his children .
Passenger transport , or travel , is divided into public and private transport .
Public transport is scheduled services on fixed routes , while private is vehicles that provide ad hoc services at the riders desire .
Travel may be as part of daily commuting , for business , leisure or migration .
The first forms of road transport involved animals , such as horses -LRB- domesticated in the 4th or 3rd millennium BCE -RRB- , oxen -LRB- from about 8000 BCE -RRB- or humans carrying goods over dirt tracks that often followed game trails .
Many early civilizations , including Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley Civilization , constructed paved roads .
In classical antiquity , the Persian and Roman empires built stone-paved roads to allow armies to travel quickly .
Deep roadbeds of crushed stone underneath kept such roads dry .
The medieval Caliphate later built tar-paved roads .
The first watercraft were canoes cut out from tree trunks .
Early water transport was accomplished with ships that were either rowed or used the wind for propulsion , or a combination of the two .
The importance of water has led to most cities that grew up as sites for trading being located on rivers or on the sea-shore , often at the intersection of two bodies of water .
Until the Industrial Revolution , transport remained slow and costly , and production and consumption gravitated as close to each other as feasible .
This creates air pollution , including nitrous oxides and particulates , and is a significant contributor to global warming through emission of carbon dioxide , for which transport is the fastest-growing emission sector .
Environmental regulations in developed countries have reduced individual vehicles ' emissions ; however , this has been offset by increases in the numbers of vehicles and in the use of each vehicle .
Some pathways to reduce the carbon emissions of road vehicles considerably have been studied .
Energy use and emissions vary largely between modes , causing environmentalists to call for a transition from air and road to rail and human-powered transport , as well as increased transport electrification and energy efficiency .
The Tolstoy family left Russia in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution and the subsequent establishment of the Soviet Union , and Leo Tolstoy 's relatives and descendants today live in Sweden , Germany , the United Kingdom , France and the United States .
Later critics and novelists continue to bear testament to Tolstoy 's art .
James Joyce noted that , `` He is never dull , never stupid , never tired , never pedantic , never theatrical ! '' .
Thomas Mann wrote of Tolstoy 's seemingly guileless artistry : `` Seldom did art work so much like nature '' .
Such sentiments were shared by the likes of Proust , Faulkner and Nabokov .
The latter heaped superlatives upon The Death of Ivan Ilyich and Anna Karenina ; he questioned , however , the reputation of War and Peace , and sharply criticized Resurrection and The Kreutzer Sonata .
War and Peace is generally thought to be one of the greatest novels ever written , remarkable for its dramatic breadth and unity .
Its vast canvas includes 580 characters , many historical with others fictional .
The story moves from family life to the headquarters of Napoleon , from the court of Alexander I of Russia to the battlefields of Austerlitz and Borodino .
Tolstoy 's original idea for the novel was to investigate the causes of the Decembrist revolt , to which it refers only in the last chapters , from which can be deduced that Andrei Bolkonsky 's son will become one of the Decembrists .
The novel explores Tolstoy 's theory of history , and in particular the insignificance of individuals such as Napoleon and Alexander .
Somewhat surprisingly , Tolstoy did not consider War and Peace to be a novel -LRB- nor did he consider many of the great Russian fictions written at that time to be novels -RRB- .
This view becomes less surprising if one considers that Tolstoy was a novelist of the realist school who considered the novel to be a framework for the examination of social and political issues in nineteenth-century life .
Tolstoy thought that Anna Karenina was his first true novel .
Reading Tolstoy 's The Kingdom of God Is Within You also convinced Gandhi to avoid violence and espouse nonviolent resistance , a debt Gandhi acknowledged in his autobiography , calling Tolstoy `` the greatest apostle of non-violence that the present age has produced '' .
The correspondence between Tolstoy and Gandhi would only last a year , from October 1909 until Tolstoy 's death in November 1910 , but led Gandhi to give the name Tolstoy Colony to his second ashram in South Africa .
Besides nonviolent resistance , the two men shared a common belief in the merits of vegetarianism , the subject of several of Tolstoy 's essays .
His conversion from a dissolute and privileged society author to the non-violent and spiritual anarchist of his latter days was brought about by his experience in the army as well as two trips around Europe in 1857 and 1860 -- 61 .
Others who followed the same path were Alexander Herzen , Mikhail Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin .
During his 1857 visit , Tolstoy witnessed a public execution in Paris , a traumatic experience that would mark the rest of his life .
Writing in a letter to his friend Vasily Botkin : `` The truth is that the State is a conspiracy designed not only to exploit , but above all to corrupt its citizens ... Henceforth , I shall never serve any government anywhere . ''
Tolstoy 's concept of non-violence or Ahimsa was bolstered when he read a German version of the Tirukkural .
He later instilled the concept in Mahatma Gandhi through his A Letter to a Hindu when young Gandhi corresponded with him seeking his advice .
Hyperrealism is a genre of painting and sculpture resembling a high-resolution photograph .
Hyperrealism is a fully fledged school of art and can be considered an advancement of Photorealism by the methods used to create the resulting paintings or sculptures .
The term is primarily applied to an independent art movement and art style in the United States and Europe that has developed since the early 2000s .
Landscape painting is a term that covers the depiction of natural scenery such as mountains , valleys , trees , rivers , and forests , and especially art where the main subject is a wide view , with its elements arranged into a coherent composition .
In other works landscape backgrounds for figures can still form an important part of the work .
Sky is almost always included in the view , and weather is often an element of the composition .
Detailed landscapes as a distinct subject are not found in all artistic traditions , and develop when there is already a sophisticated tradition of representing other subjects .
The two main traditions spring from Western painting and Chinese art , going back well over a thousand years in both cases .
Color is highly subjective , but has observable psychological effects , although these can differ from one culture to the next .
Black is associated with mourning in the West , but in the East , white is .
Some painters , theoreticians , writers and scientists , including Goethe , Kandinsky , and Newton , have written their own color theory .
Translation of sung texts is generally much more restrictive than translation of poetry , because in the former there is little or no freedom to choose between a versified translation and a translation that dispenses with verse structure .
One might modify or omit rhyme in a singing translation , but the assignment of syllables to specific notes in the original musical setting places great challenges on the translator .
There is the option in prose sung texts , less so in verse , of adding or deleting a syllable here and there by subdividing or combining notes , respectively , but even with prose the process is almost like strict verse translation because of the need to stick as closely as possible to the original prosody of the sung melodic line .
Translation of material into Arabic expanded after the creation of Arabic script in the 5th century , and gained great importance with the rise of Islam and Islamic empires .
Arab translation initially focused primarily on politics , rendering Persian , Greek , even Chinese and Indic diplomatic materials into Arabic .
In terms of theory , Arabic translation drew heavily on earlier Near Eastern traditions as well as more contemporary Greek and Persian traditions .
A 17th-century French critic coined the phrase `` les belles infidèles '' to suggest that translations , like women , can be either faithful or beautiful , but not both .
Nearly three centuries later , in the United States , a comparable role as interpreter was played for the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1804 -- 6 by Sacagawea .
As a child , the Lemhi Shoshone woman had been kidnapped by Hidatsa Indians and thus had become bilingual .
Sacagawea facilitated the expedition 's traverse of the North American continent to the Pacific Ocean .
Four decades later , in 1846 , the Pacific would become the western border of the United States .
In the 3rd century BC , Hellenistic mathematicians such as Euclid and Archimedes studied the properties of chords and inscribed angles in circles , and they proved theorems that are equivalent to modern trigonometric formulae , although they presented them geometrically rather than algebraically .
In 140 BC , Hipparchus -LRB- from Nicaea , Asia Minor -RRB- gave the first tables of chords , analogous to modern tables of sine values , and used them to solve problems in trigonometry and spherical trigonometry .
In the 2nd century AD , the Greco-Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy -LRB- from Alexandria , Egypt -RRB- printed detailed trigonometric tables -LRB- Ptolemy 's table of chords -RRB- in Book 1 , chapter 11 of his Almagest .
Ptolemy used chord length to define his trigonometric functions , a minor difference from the sine convention we use today .
-LRB- The value we call sin -LRB- θ -RRB- can be found by looking up the chord length for twice the angle of interest -LRB- 2θ -RRB- in Ptolemy 's table , and then dividing that value by two . -RRB-
Centuries passed before more detailed tables were produced , and Ptolemy 's treatise remained in use for performing trigonometric calculations in astronomy throughout the next 1200 years in the medieval Byzantine , Islamic , and , later , Western European worlds .
The games played with dominoes largely center around playing a domino from the player 's `` hand '' onto the matching end of another domino , and the overall object could be to always be able to make a play , to make all open endpoints sum to a given number or multiple , or simply to play all dominoes from one 's hand onto the board .
Sets vary in the number of possible dots on one end , and thus of the number of combinations and pieces ; the most common set historically is double-six , though in more recent times `` extended '' sets such as double-nine have been introduced to increase the number of dominoes available , which allows larger hands and more players in a game .
Ludwig Wittgenstein was probably the first academic philosopher to address the definition of the word game .
In his Philosophical Investigations , Wittgenstein argued that the elements of games , such as play , rules , and competition , all fail to adequately define what games are .
From this , Wittgenstein concluded that people apply the term game to a range of disparate human activities that bear to one another only what one might call family resemblances .
As the following game definitions show , this conclusion was not a final one and today many philosophers , like Thomas Hurka , think that Wittgenstein was wrong and that Bernard Suits ' definition is a good answer to the problem .
A guessing game has as its core a piece of information that one player knows , and the object is to coerce others into guessing that piece of information without actually divulging it in text or spoken word .
Charades is probably the most well-known game of this type , and has spawned numerous commercial variants that involve differing rules on the type of communication to be given , such as Catch Phrase , Taboo , Pictionary , and similar .
The genre also includes many game shows such as Win , Lose or Draw , Password and $ 25,000 Pyramid .
In Latin , and in English until around 1700 , the term mathematics more commonly meant `` astrology '' -LRB- or sometimes `` astronomy '' -RRB- rather than `` mathematics '' ; the meaning gradually changed to its present one from about 1500 to 1800 .
This has resulted in several mistranslations : a particularly notorious one is Saint Augustine 's warning that Christians should beware of mathematici meaning astrologers , which is sometimes mistranslated as a condemnation of mathematicians .
For those who are mathematically inclined , there is often a definite aesthetic aspect to much of mathematics .
Many mathematicians talk about the elegance of mathematics , its intrinsic aesthetics and inner beauty .
G.H. Hardy in A Mathematician 's Apology expressed the belief that these aesthetic considerations are , in themselves , sufficient to justify the study of pure mathematics .
He identified criteria such as significance , unexpectedness , inevitability , and economy as factors that contribute to a mathematical aesthetic .
Mathematicians often strive to find proofs that are particularly elegant , proofs from `` The Book '' of God according to Paul Erdős .
The popularity of recreational mathematics is another sign of the pleasure many find in solving mathematical questions .
Most of the mathematical notation in use today was not invented until the 16th century .
Before that , mathematics was written out in words , limiting mathematical discovery .
Modern notation makes mathematics much easier for the professional , but beginners often find it daunting .
Amniotic eggs , however , have internal membranes that allow the developing embryo to breathe but keep water in .
Hence , amniotes can lay eggs on dry land , while amphibians generally need to lay their eggs in water .
The earliest known monotreme was Teinolophos , which lived about 120 million years ago in Australia .
Monotremes have some features which may be inherited from the original amniotes such as the same orifice to urinate , defecate and reproduce -LRB- cloaca -RRB- -- as lizards and birds also do -- and they lay eggs which are leathery and uncalcified .
Nearly all mammaliaforms possess an epipubic bone , the exception being modern placentals .
Most mammals also have hair to help keep them warm .
A rare exception , the naked mole-rat produces little metabolic heat , so it is considered an operational poikilotherm .
Some mammals are intelligent , with some possessing large brains , self-awareness and tool use .
Mammals can communicate and vocalize in several different ways , including the production of ultrasound , scent-marking , alarm signals , singing , and echolocation .
Mammals can organize themselves into fission-fusion societies , harems , and hierarchies , but can also be solitary and territorial .
Because the animal is in motion , there is some airflow relative to its body which , combined with the velocity of the wings , generates a faster airflow moving over the wing .
This generates a lift force vector pointing forwards and upwards , and a drag force vector pointing rearwards and upwards .
The upwards components of these counteract gravity , keeping the body in the air , while the forward component provides thrust to counteract both the drag from the wing and from the body as a whole .
To maintain a high constant body temperature is energy expensive -- mammals therefore need a nutritious and plentiful diet .
While the earliest mammals were probably predators , different species have since adapted to meet their dietary requirements in a variety of ways .
Some eat other animals -- this is a carnivorous diet -LRB- and includes insectivorous diets -RRB- .
Other mammals , called herbivores , eat plants , which contain complex carbohydrates such as cellulose .
An herbivorous diet includes subtypes such as granivory -LRB- seed eating -RRB- , folivory -LRB- leaf eating -RRB- , frugivory -LRB- fruit eating -RRB- , nectarivory -LRB- nectar eating -RRB- , gummivory -LRB- gum eating -RRB- and mycophagy -LRB- fungus eating -RRB- .
The digestive tract of an herbivore is host to bacteria that ferment these complex substances , and make them available for digestion , which are either housed in the multichambered stomach or in a large cecum .
Some mammals are coprophagous , consuming feces to absorb the nutrients not digested when the food was first ingested .
An omnivore eats both prey and plants .
Carnivorous mammals have a simple digestive tract because the proteins , lipids and minerals found in meat require little in the way of specialized digestion .
Exceptions to this include baleen whales who also house gut flora in a multi-chambered stomach , like terrestrial herbivores .
Some mammals are omnivores and display varying degrees of carnivory and herbivory , generally leaning in favor of one more than the other .
The dentition of hypocarnivores consists of dull , triangular carnassial teeth meant for grinding food .
Hypercarnivores , however , have conical teeth and sharp carnassials meant for slashing , and in some cases strong jaws for bone-crushing , as in the case of hyenas , allowing them to consume bones ; some extinct groups , notably the Machairodontinae , had saber-shaped canines .
According to Maurice Glaize , a mid-20th-century conservator of Angkor , the temple `` attains a classic perfection by the restrained monumentality of its finely balanced elements and the precise arrangement of its proportions .
Towards the end of the 12th century , Angkor Wat gradually transformed from a Hindu centre of worship to Buddhism , which continues to the present day .
Angkor Wat is unusual among the Angkor temples in that although it was somewhat neglected after the 16th century it was never completely abandoned , its preservation being due in part to the fact that its moat also provided some protection from encroachment by the jungle .
In 1564 , Mughal forces conquered the Gondwana kingdom .
Finally , he submitted and Akbar restored him to his previous position .
The territory was ruled over by Raja Vir Narayan , a minor , and his mother , Durgavati , a Rajput warrior queen of the Gonds .
Akbar did not personally lead the campaign because he was preoccupied with the Uzbek rebellion , but left the expedition in the hands of Asaf Khan , the Mughal governor of Kara .
Durgavati committed suicide after her defeat at the Battle of Damoh while Raja Vir Narayan was slain at the Fall of Chauragarh , the mountain fortress of the Gonds .
The Mughals seized immense wealth , an uncalculated amount of gold and silver , jewels and 1000 elephants .
Kamala Devi , a younger sister of Durgavati , was sent to the Mughal harem .
Like in Malwa , however , Akbar entered into a dispute with his vassals over the conquest of Gondwana .
Asaf Khan was accused of keeping most of the treasures , and sending back only 200 elephants to Akbar .
Despite his pact with the Uzbeks , Akbar nurtured a secret hope of reconquering Central Asia from today 's Afghanistan .
However , Badakshan and Balkh remained firmly part of the Uzbek dominions .
The last of the rebellious Afghan tribes were subdued by 1600 .
The Roshaniyya movement was firmly suppressed .
The leaders of the movement were captured and driven into exile .
Jalaluddin , the son of the Roshaniyya movement 's founder , Bayazid , was killed in 1601 in a fight with Mughal troops near Ghazni .
Kandahar was the name given by Arab historians to the ancient Indian kingdom of Gandhara .
It was intimately connected with the Mughals since the time of their ancestor , Timur , the warlord who had conquered much of Western , Central , and parts of South Asia in the 14th century .
However , the Safavids considered it as an appanage of the Persian ruled territory of Khorasan and declared its association with the Mughal emperors to be a usurpation .
In 1558 , while Akbar was consolidating his rule over northern India , the Safavid emperor , Tahmasp I , had seized Kandahar and expelled its Mughal governor .
The recovery of Kandahar had not been a priority for Akbar , but after his prolonged military activity in the northern frontiers , a move to restore Mughal rule over the region became desirable .
The conquests of Sindh , Kashmir and parts of Baluchistan , and the ongoing consolidation of Mughal power over today 's Afghanistan had added to Akbar 's confidence .
Furthermore , Kandahar was at this time under threat from the Uzbeks , but the Emperor of Persia , himself beleaguered by the Ottoman Turks , was unable to send any reinforcements .
Circumstances favoured the Mughals .
In 1593 , Akbar began military operations against the Deccan Sultans who had not submitted to his authority .
He besieged Ahmednagar Fort in 1595 , forcing Chand Bibi to cede Berar .
A subsequent revolt forced Akbar to take the fort in Aug. 1600 .
Akbar occupied Burhanpur and besieged Asirgarh Fort in 1599 , and took it on 17 Jan. 1601 , when Miran Bahadur Shah refused to submit Khandesh .
`` By the time of his death in 1605 , Akbar controlled a broad sweep of territory from the Bay of Bengal to Qandahar and Badakshan .
Akbar was impressed by the scholastic qualities and character of the Acharya .
Akbar also issued many imperial orders that were favourable for Jain interests , such as banning animal slaughter .
Jain authors also wrote about their experience at the Mughal court in Sanskrit texts that are still largely unknown to Mughal historians .
Akbar was a warrior , emperor , general , animal trainer -LRB- reputedly keeping thousands of hunting cheetahs during his reign and training many himself -RRB- , and theologian .
Bhavishya Puranais a minor Purana that depicts the various Hindu holy days and includes a section devoted to the various dynasties which ruled India , having its oldest portion dated to 500 CE and newest to the 18th century .
It contains a story about Akbar in which he is compared to the other Mughal rulers .
The section called `` Akbar Bahshaha Varnan '' written in Sanskrit describes his birth as a `` reincarnation '' of a sage who immolated himself on seeing the first Mughal ruler Babur , who is described as the `` cruel king of Mlecchas -LRB- Muslims -RRB- '' .
In this text it is stated that Akbar `` was a miraculous child '' and that he would not follow the previous `` violent ways '' of the Mughals .
Most of the early rap/hip-hop songs were created by isolating existing disco bass-guitar lines and dubbing over them with MC rhymes .
The Sugarhill Gang used Chic 's `` Good Times '' as the foundation for their 1979 hit `` Rapper 's Delight '' , generally considered to be the song that first popularized rap music in the United States and around the world .
In 1982 , Afrika Bambaataa released the single `` Planet Rock '' , which incorporated electronica elements from Kraftwerk 's `` Trans-Europe Express '' and `` Numbers '' as well as YMO 's `` Riot in Lagos '' .
The Planet Rock sound also spawned a hip-hop electronic dance trend , electro music , which included songs such as Planet Patrol 's `` Play at Your Own Risk '' -LRB- 1982 -RRB- , C Bank 's `` One More Shot '' -LRB- 1982 -RRB- , Cerrone 's `` Club Underworld '' -LRB- 1984 -RRB- , Shannon 's `` Let the Music Play '' -LRB- 1983 -RRB- , Freeez 's `` I.O.U. '' -LRB- 1983 -RRB- , Midnight Star 's `` Freak-a-Zoid '' -LRB- 1983 -RRB- , Chaka Khan 's `` I Feel For You '' -LRB- 1984 -RRB- .
Their styles differed from other hip hop musicians who focused on rapid-fire rhymes and more complex rhythmic schemes .
In Washington , D.C. go-go emerged as a reaction against disco and eventually incorporated characteristics of hip hop during the early 1980s .
The DJ-based genre of electronic music behaved similarly , eventually evolving into underground styles known as house music in Chicago and techno in Detroit .
The New York Times had dubbed Philadelphia the `` Graffiti Capital of the World '' in 1971 .
Philadelphia native DJ Lady B recorded `` To the Beat Y' All '' in 1979 , and became the first female solo hip hop artist to record music .
Schoolly D , starting in 1984 and also from Philadelphia , began creating a style that would later be known as gangsta rap .
The golden age is noted for its innovation -- a time `` when it seemed that every new single reinvented the genre '' according to Rolling Stone .
Referring to `` hip-hop in its golden age '' , Spin 's editor-in-chief Sia Michel says , `` there were so many important , groundbreaking albums coming out right about that time '' , and MTV 's Sway Calloway adds : `` The thing that made that era so great is that nothing was contrived .
Writer William Jelani Cobb says `` what made the era they inaugurated worthy of the term golden was the sheer number of stylistic innovations that came into existence ... in these golden years , a critical mass of mic prodigies were literally creating themselves and their art form at the same time '' .
West emerged the victor , selling nearly a million copies in the first week alone , proving that innovative rap music could be just as commercially viable as gangsta rap , if not more so .
While his decision to sing about love , loneliness , and heartache for the entirety of the album was at first heavily criticized by music audiences and the album predicted to be a flop , its subsequent critical acclaim and commercial success encouraged other mainstream rappers to take greater creative risks with their music .
During the release of The Blueprint 3 , New York rap mogul Jay-Z revealed that next studio album would be an experimental effort , stating , '' ... it 's not gon na be a # 1 album .
Jay-Z elaborated that like Kanye , he was unsatisfied with contemporary hip hop , was being inspired by indie-rockers like Grizzly Bear and asserted his belief that the indie rock movement would play an important role in the continued evolution of hip-hop .
In 1934 , the Austrian philosopher Hans Kelsen continued the positivist tradition in his book the Pure Theory of Law .
Kelsen believed that although law is separate from morality , it is endowed with `` normativity '' , meaning we ought to obey it .
Thus , each legal system can be hypothesised to have a basic norm -LRB- Grundnorm -RRB- instructing us to obey .
Kelsen 's major opponent , Carl Schmitt , rejected both positivism and the idea of the rule of law because he did not accept the primacy of abstract normative principles over concrete political positions and decisions .
Therefore , Schmitt advocated a jurisprudence of the exception -LRB- state of emergency -RRB- , which denied that legal norms could encompass all of political experience .
Criminal law offences are viewed as offences against not just individual victims , but the community as well .
The state , usually with the help of police , takes the lead in prosecution , which is why in common law countries cases are cited as `` The People v ... '' or `` R -LRB- for Rex or Regina -RRB- v ... '' .
Also , lay juries are often used to determine the guilt of defendants on points of fact : juries can not change legal rules .
Some developed countries still condone capital punishment for criminal activity , but the normal punishment for a crime will be imprisonment , fines , state supervision -LRB- such as probation -RRB- , or community service .
Modern criminal law has been affected considerably by the social sciences , especially with respect to sentencing , legal research , legislation , and rehabilitation .
On the international field , 111 countries are members of the International Criminal Court , which was established to try people for crimes against humanity .
Equity is a body of rules that developed in England separately from the `` common law '' .
The common law was administered by judges and barristers .
The landlord had -LRB- apparently -RRB- told Mr Sandford that he did not want the child to have the renewed lease .
Yet the landlord was happy -LRB- apparently -RRB- to give Mr Sandford the opportunity of the lease instead .
When the child -LRB- now Mr Keech -RRB- grew up , he sued Mr Sandford for the profit that he had been making by getting the market 's lease .
Mr Sandford was meant to be trusted , but he put himself in a position of conflict of interest .
The Lord Chancellor , Lord King , agreed and ordered Mr Sandford should disgorge his profits .
The Lord Chancellor on the other hand , as the King 's keeper of conscience , could overrule the judge-made law if he thought it equitable to do so .
This meant equity came to operate more through principles than rigid rules .
For instance , whereas neither the common law nor civil law systems allow people to split the ownership from the control of one piece of property , equity allows this through an arrangement known as a ` trust ' .
` Trustees ' control property , whereas the ` beneficial ' -LRB- or ` equitable ' -RRB- ownership of trust property is held by people known as ` beneficiaries ' .
Trustees owe duties to their beneficiaries to take good care of the entrusted property .
In the early case of Keech v Sandford -LSB- 1722 -RSB- a child had inherited the lease on a market in Romford , London .
Mr Sandford was entrusted to look after this property until the child matured .
But before then , the lease expired .
In the soil , the roots encounter the hyphae of fungi .
Many of these are known as mycorrhiza and form a mutualistic relationship with the tree roots .
Others are generalists and associate with many species .
The tree acquires minerals such as phosphorus from the fungus while it obtains the carbohydrate products of photosynthesis from the tree .
The hyphae of the fungus can link different trees and a network is formed , transferring nutrients from one place to another .
The fungus promotes growth of the roots and helps protect the trees against predators and pathogens .
It can also limit damage done to a tree by pollution as the fungus accumulate heavy metals within its tissues .
Fossil evidence shows that roots have been associated with mycorrhizal fungi since the early Paleozoic , four hundred million years ago , when the first vascular plants colonised dry land .
Some tree species have developed root extensions that pop out of soil , in order to get oxygen , when it is not available in the soil because of excess water .
These root extensions are called pneumatophores , and are present , among others , in black mangrove and pond cypress .
Seeds are the primary way that trees reproduce and their seeds vary greatly in size and shape .
Some of the largest seeds come from trees , but the largest tree , Sequoiadendron giganteum , produces one of the smallest tree seeds .
The great diversity in tree fruits and seeds reflects the many different ways that tree species have evolved to disperse their offspring .
The single extant species of Ginkgophyta -LRB- Ginkgo biloba -RRB- has fleshy seeds produced at the ends of short branches on female trees , and Gnetum , a tropical and subtropical group of gymnosperms produce seeds at the tip of a shoot axis .
The seeds of conifers , the largest group of gymnosperms , are enclosed in a cone and most species have seeds that are light and papery that can be blown considerable distances once free from the cone .
Sometimes the seed remains in the cone for years waiting for a trigger event to liberate it .
Fire stimulates release and germination of seeds of the jack pine , and also enriches the forest floor with wood ash and removes competing vegetation .
Similarly , a number of angiosperms including Acacia cyclops and Acacia mangium have seeds that germinate better after exposure to high temperatures .
The earliest tree-like organisms were tree ferns , horsetails and lycophytes , which grew in forests in the Carboniferous period .
The first tree may have been Wattieza , fossils of which have been found in New York State in 2007 dating back to the Middle Devonian -LRB- about 385 million years ago -RRB- .
Both of these reproduced by spores rather than seeds and are considered to be links between ferns and the gymnosperms which evolved in the Triassic period .
The gymnosperms include conifers , cycads , gnetales and ginkgos and these may have appeared as a result of a whole genome duplication event which took place about 319 million years ago .
This is considered to be a living fossil because it is virtually unchanged from the fossilised specimens found in Triassic deposits .
The art of growing a miniature tree or trees in a low-sided pot or tray -RRB- is the practice of hòn non bộ originated in China and spread to Japan more than a thousand years ago , there are similar practices in other cultures like the living miniature landscapes of Vietnam hòn non bộ .
The word bonsai is often used in English as an umbrella term for all miniature trees in containers or pots .
Tree shaping is the practice of changing living trees and other woody plants into man made shapes for art and useful structures .
There is a gradual method and there is an instant method , the gradual method slowly guides the growing tip along predetermined path ways over time where as the instant method bends and weaves saplings 2 to 3 m -LRB- 6.6 to 9.8 ft -RRB- long into a shape that becomes more rigid as they thicken up .
Most artists use grafting of living trunks , branches , and roots , for art or functional structures and there are plans to grow `` living houses '' with the branches of trees knitting together to give a solid , weatherproof exterior combined with an interior application of straw and clay to provide a stucco-like inner surface .
Latex is a sticky defensive secretion that protects plants against herbivores .
Many trees produce it when injured but the main source of the latex used to make natural rubber is the Pará rubber tree -LRB- Hevea brasiliensis -RRB- .
Originally used to create bouncy balls and for the waterproofing of cloth , natural rubber is now mainly used in tyres for which synthetic materials have proved less durable .
The latex exuded by the balatá tree -LRB- Manilkara bidentata -RRB- is used to make golf balls and is similar to gutta-percha , made from the latex of the `` getah perca '' tree Palaquium .
This is also used as an insulator , particularly of undersea cables , and in dentistry , walking sticks and gun butts .
The Oubangui people of west Africa plant a tree when a child is born .
As the tree flourishes , so does the child but if the tree fails to thrive , the health of the child is considered at risk .
Gifts are left at the tree periodically and when the individual dies , their spirit is believed to live on in the tree .
Sacred groves exist in China , India , Africa and elsewhere .
Folklore lays down the supernatural penalties that will result if desecration takes place for example by the felling of trees .
Some Ancient Indian tree deities , such as Puliyidaivalaiyamman , the Tamil deity of the tamarind tree , or Kadambariyamman , associated with the kadamba tree were seen as manifestations of a goddess who offers her blessings by giving fruits in abundance .
During a sandstorm , the wind-blown sand particles become electrically charged .
Such electric fields , which range in size up to 80 kV/m , can produce sparks and cause interference with telecommunications equipment .
The electric fields are caused by collision between airborne particles and by the impacts of saltating sand grains landing on the ground .
A large part of the surface area of the world 's deserts consists of flat , stone-covered plains dominated by wind erosion .
In `` eolian deflation '' , the wind continually removes fine-grained material , which becomes wind-blown sand .
This exposes coarser-grained material , mainly pebbles with some larger stones or cobbles , leaving a desert pavement , an area of land overlaid by closely packed smooth stones forming a tessellated mosaic .
It may be that after the sand and dust is blown away by the wind the stones jiggle themselves into place ; alternatively , stones previously below ground may in some way work themselves to the surface .
Very little further erosion takes place after the formation of a pavement , and the ground becomes stable .
Evaporation brings moisture to the surface by capillary action and calcium salts may be precipitated , binding particles together to form a desert conglomerate .
In time , bacteria that live on the surface of the stones accumulate a film of minerals and clay particles , forming a shiny brown coating known as desert varnish .
Other non-sandy deserts consist of exposed outcrops of bedrock , dry soils or aridisols , and a variety of landforms affected by flowing water , such as alluvial fans , sinks or playas , temporary or permanent lakes , and oases .
A hamada is a type of desert landscape consisting of a high rocky plateau where the sand has been removed by aeolian processes .
Other landforms include plains largely covered by gravels and angular boulders , from which the finer particles have been stripped by the wind .
These are called `` reg '' in the western Sahara , `` serir '' in the eastern Sahara , `` gibber plains '' in Australia and `` saï '' in central Asia .
In some places the wind has carved holes or arches and in others it has created mushroom-like pillars narrower at the base than the top .
Here the Colorado River has cut its way over the millennia through the high desert floor creating a canyon that is over a mile -LRB- 6,000 feet or 1,800 meters -RRB- deep in places , exposing strata that are over two billion year old .
Animals adapted to live in deserts are called xerocoles .
In fact , with a very few exceptions , their basal metabolic rate is determined by body size , irrespective of the climate in which they live .
Many desert animals -LRB- and plants -RRB- show especially clear evolutionary adaptations for water conservation or heat tolerance and so are often studied in comparative physiology , ecophysiology , and evolutionary physiology .
One well-studied example is the specializations of mammalian kidneys shown by desert-inhabiting species .
Many examples of convergent evolution have been identified in desert organisms , including between cacti and Euphorbia , kangaroo rats and jerboas , Phrynosoma and Moloch lizards .
People have been living in deserts for millennia .
They developed skills in the manufacture and use of weapons , animal tracking , finding water , foraging for edible plants and using the things they found in their natural environment to supply their everyday needs .
Their self-sufficient skills and knowledge were passed down through the generations by word of mouth .
Other cultures developed a nomadic way of life as herders of sheep , goats , cattle , camels , yaks , llamas or reindeer .
They travelled over large areas with their herds , moving to new pastures as seasonal and erratic rainfall encouraged new plant growth .
They took with them their tents made of cloth or skins draped over poles and their diet included milk , blood and sometimes meat .
The Judean Desert was farmed in the 7th century BC during the Iron Age to supply food for desert forts .
Native Americans in the south western United States became agriculturalists around 600 AD when seeds and technologies became available from Mexico .
They used terracing techniques and grew gardens beside seeps , in moist areas at the foot of dunes , near streams providing flood irrigation and in areas irrigated by extensive specially built canals .
The Hohokam tribe constructed over 500 miles -LRB- 800 km -RRB- of large canals and maintained them for centuries , an impressive feat of engineering .
The Negev Desert , Israel , and the surrounding area , including the Arava Valley , receive plenty of sunshine and are generally not arable .
This has resulted in the construction of many solar plants .
David Faiman has proposed that `` giant '' solar plants in the Negev could supply all of Israel 's needs for electricity .
Separation of prescribing and dispensing is a practice in medicine and pharmacy in which the physician who provides a medical prescription is independent from the pharmacist who provides the prescription drug .
In Asian countries it is traditional for physicians to also provide drugs .
In contrast to macroscopic or gross anatomy , cytology and histology are concerned with microscopic structures .
Surgery is an ancient medical specialty that uses operative manual and instrumental techniques on a patient to investigate and/or treat a pathological condition such as disease or injury , to help improve bodily function or appearance or to repair unwanted ruptured areas -LRB- for example , a perforated ear drum -RRB- .
Surgeons must also manage pre-operative , post-operative , and potential surgical candidates on the hospital wards .
Surgery has many sub-specialties , including general surgery , ophthalmic surgery , cardiovascular surgery , colorectal surgery , neurosurgery , oral and maxillofacial surgery , oncologic surgery , orthopedic surgery , otolaryngology , plastic surgery , podiatric surgery , transplant surgery , trauma surgery , urology , vascular surgery , and pediatric surgery .
Other medical specialties may employ surgical procedures , such as ophthalmology and dermatology , but are not considered surgical sub-specialties per se .
Diagnostic radiology is concerned with imaging of the body , e.g. by x-rays , x-ray computed tomography , ultrasonography , and nuclear magnetic resonance tomography .
Interventional radiologists can access areas in the body under imaging for an intervention or diagnostic sampling .
Anesthesiology -LRB- also known as anaesthetics -RRB- : concerned with the perioperative management of the surgical patient .
The anesthesiologist 's role during surgery is to prevent derangement in the vital organs ' -LRB- i.e. brain , heart , kidneys -RRB- functions and postoperative pain .
Outside of the operating room , the anesthesiology physician also serves the same function in the labor & delivery ward , and some are specialized in critical medicine .
Physicians whose primary professional focus is hospital medicine are called hospitalists in the United States and Canada .
The term Most Responsible Physician -LRB- MRP -RRB- or attending physician is also used interchangeably to describe this role .
Medical ethics is a system of moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine .
As a scholarly discipline , medical ethics encompasses its practical application in clinical settings as well as work on its history , philosophy , theology , and sociology .
Six of the values that commonly apply to medical ethics discussions are :
Prehistoric medicine incorporated plants -LRB- herbalism -RRB- , animal parts , and minerals .
Well-known spiritual systems include animism -LRB- the notion of inanimate objects having spirits -RRB- , spiritualism -LRB- an appeal to gods or communion with ancestor spirits -RRB- ; shamanism -LRB- the vesting of an individual with mystic powers -RRB- ; and divination -LRB- magically obtaining the truth -RRB- .
The field of medical anthropology examines the ways in which culture and society are organized around or impacted by issues of health , health care and related issues .
In Greece , the Greek physician Hippocrates , the `` father of western medicine '' , laid the foundation for a rational approach to medicine .
Hippocrates introduced the Hippocratic Oath for physicians , which is still relevant and in use today , and was the first to categorize illnesses as acute , chronic , endemic and epidemic , and use terms such as , `` exacerbation , relapse , resolution , crisis , paroxysm , peak , and convalescence '' .
The Greek physician Galen was also one of the greatest surgeons of the ancient world and performed many audacious operations , including brain and eye surgeries .
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages , the Greek tradition of medicine went into decline in Western Europe , although it continued uninterrupted in the Eastern Roman -LRB- Byzantine -RRB- Empire .
This was the notion that because some prominent person in the past said something must be so , then that was the way it was , and anything one observed to the contrary was an anomaly -LRB- which was paralleled by a similar shift in European society in general -- see Copernicus 's rejection of Ptolemy 's theories on astronomy -RRB- .
Physicians like Vesalius improved upon or disproved some of the theories from the past .
Throughout history and in Europe right until the late 18th century , not only animal and plant products were used as medicine , but also human body parts and fluids .
Pharmacology developed in part from herbalism and some drugs are still derived from plants -LRB- atropine , ephedrine , warfarin , aspirin , digoxin , vinca alkaloids , taxol , hyoscine , etc. -RRB- .
Vaccines were discovered by Edward Jenner and Louis Pasteur .
Traditional medicine may include formalized aspects of folk medicine , that is to say longstanding remedies passed on and practised by lay people .
Folk medicine consists of the healing practices and ideas of body physiology and health preservation known to some in a culture , transmitted informally as general knowledge , and practiced or applied by anyone in the culture having prior experience .
Folk medicine may also be referred to as traditional medicine , alternative medicine , indigenous medicine , or natural medicine .
These terms are often considered interchangeable , even though some authors may prefer one or the other because of certain overtones they may be willing to highlight .
Greek drama exemplifies the earliest form of drama of which we have substantial knowledge .
Tragedy , as a dramatic genre , developed as a performance associated with religious and civic festivals , typically enacting or developing upon well-known historical or mythological themes .
Tragedies generally presented very serious themes .
With the advent of newer technologies , scripts written for non-stage media have been added to this form .
War of the Worlds -LRB- radio -RRB- in 1938 saw the advent of literature written for radio broadcast , and many works of Drama have been adapted for film or television .
Conversely , television , film , and radio literature have been adapted to printed or electronic media .
Mathematics and architecture are related , since , as with other arts , architects use mathematics for several reasons .
Apart from the mathematics needed when engineering buildings , architects use geometry : to define the spatial form of a building ; from the Pythagoreans of the sixth century BC onwards , to create forms considered harmonious , and thus to lay out buildings and their surroundings according to mathematical , aesthetic and sometimes religious principles ; to decorate buildings with mathematical objects such as tessellations ; and to meet environmental goals , such as to minimise wind speeds around the bases of tall buildings .
Most ceramic materials , such as alumina and its compounds , are formed from fine powders , yielding a fine grained polycrystalline microstructure which is filled with light scattering centers comparable to the wavelength of visible light .
Advanced ceramics are also used in the medicine , electrical and electronics industries .
The branch of physics that deals with solids is called solid-state physics , and is the main branch of condensed matter physics -LRB- which also includes liquids -RRB- .
Materials science is primarily concerned with the physical and chemical properties of solids .
Glass ceramics may also occur naturally when lightning strikes the crystalline -LRB- e.g. quartz -RRB- grains found in most beach sand .
In this case , the extreme and immediate heat of the lightning -LRB- ~ 2500 ° C -RRB- creates hollow , branching rootlike structures called fulgurite via fusion .
Applications of composite materials range from structural elements such as steel-reinforced concrete , to the thermally insulative tiles which play a key and integral role in NASA 's Space Shuttle thermal protection system which is used to protect the surface of the shuttle from the heat of re-entry into the Earth 's atmosphere .
One example is Reinforced Carbon-Carbon -LRB- RCC -RRB- , the light gray material which withstands reentry temperatures up to 1510 ° C -LRB- 2750 ° F -RRB- and protects the nose cap and leading edges of Space Shuttle 's wings .
RCC is a laminated composite material made from graphite rayon cloth and impregnated with a phenolic resin .
After curing at high temperature in an autoclave , the laminate is pyrolized to convert the resin to carbon , impregnated with furfural alcohol in a vacuum chamber , and cured/pyrolized to convert the furfural alcohol to carbon .
In order to provide oxidation resistance for reuse capability , the outer layers of the RCC are converted to silicon carbide .
A dielectric , such as plastic , tends to concentrate an applied electric field within itself which property is used in capacitors .
A capacitor is an electrical device that can store energy in the electric field between a pair of closely spaced conductors -LRB- called ` plates ' -RRB- .
When voltage is applied to the capacitor , electric charges of equal magnitude , but opposite polarity , build up on each plate .
Capacitors are used in electrical circuits as energy-storage devices , as well as in electronic filters to differentiate between high-frequency and low-frequency signals .
Whether a solid is crystalline or amorphous depends on the material involved , and the conditions in which it was formed .
Solids which are formed by slow cooling will tend to be crystalline , while solids which are frozen rapidly are more likely to be amorphous .
Likewise , the specific crystal structure adopted by a crystalline solid depends on the material involved and on how it was formed .
In hydraulic systems , liquid is used to transmit power .
The symbol used to represent density in equations is ρ -LRB- rho -RRB- with SI units of kilograms per cubic meter .
The gaseous state of matter is found between the liquid and plasma states , the latter of which provides the upper temperature boundary for gases .
Bounding the lower end of the temperature scale lie degenerative quantum gases which are gaining increasing attention .
High-density atomic gases super cooled to incredibly low temperatures are classified by their statistical behavior as either a Bose gas or a Fermi gas .
Written this way , it is sometimes called the `` chemist 's version '' , since it emphasizes the number of molecules n .
In 1811 , Amedeo Avogadro verified that equal volumes of pure gases contain the same number of particles .
His theory was not generally accepted until 1858 when another Italian chemist Stanislao Cannizzaro was able to explain non-ideal exceptions .
For his work with gases a century prior , the number that bears his name Avogadro 's constant represents the number of atoms found in 12 grams of elemental carbon-12 -LRB- 6.022 × 1023 mol − 1 -RRB- .
This specific number of gas particles , at standard temperature and pressure -LRB- ideal gas law -RRB- occupies 22.40 liters , which is referred to as the molar volume .
This was because certain gases suggested a supernatural origin , such as from their ability to cause death , extinguish flames , and to occur in `` mines , bottom of wells , churchyards and other lonely places '' .
Because most gases are difficult to observe directly , they are described through the use of four physical properties or macroscopic characteristics : pressure , volume , number of particles -LRB- chemists group them by moles -RRB- and temperature .
These four characteristics were repeatedly observed by scientists such as Robert Boyle , Jacques Charles , John Dalton , Joseph Gay-Lussac and Amedeo Avogadro for a variety of gases in various settings .
Their detailed studies ultimately led to a mathematical relationship among these properties expressed by the ideal gas law -LRB- see simplified models section below -RRB- .
Humans can hear sound waves with frequencies between about 20 Hz and 20 kHz .
Most languages today , even in countries that have no direct link to Greco-Roman culture , use some variant of the name `` Neptune '' for the planet .
However , in Chinese , Japanese , and Korean , the planet 's name was translated as `` sea king star '' -LRB- 海王星 -RRB- , because Neptune was the god of the sea .
In Mongolian , Neptune is called Dalain Van -LRB- Далайн ван -RRB- , reflecting its namesake god 's role as the ruler of the sea .
In modern Greek the planet is called Poseidon -LRB- Ποσειδώνας , Poseidonas -RRB- , the Greek counterpart of Neptune .
In Hebrew , `` Rahab '' -LRB- רהב -RRB- , from a Biblical sea monster mentioned in the Book of Psalms , was selected in a vote managed by the Academy of the Hebrew Language in 2009 as the official name for the planet , even though the existing Latin term `` Neptun '' -LRB- נפטון -RRB- is commonly used .
In Māori , the planet is called Tangaroa , named after the Māori god of the sea .
In Nahuatl , the planet is called Tlāloccītlalli , named after the rain god Tlāloc .
In Thai , Neptune is referred both by its Westernised name Dao Nepjun -LRB- ดาวเนปจูน -RRB- , and is also named Dao Ketu -LRB- ดาวเกตุ , `` Star of Ketu '' -RRB- , after the descending lunar node Ketu -LRB- केतु -RRB- who plays a role in Hindu astrology .
As is customary in planetary science , this mixture is referred to as icy even though it is a hot , dense fluid .
This fluid , which has a high electrical conductivity , is sometimes called a water -- ammonia ocean .
The mantle may consist of a layer of ionic water in which the water molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions , and deeper down superionic water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions float around freely within the oxygen lattice .
At a depth of 7000 km , the conditions may be such that methane decomposes into diamond crystals that rain downwards like hailstones .
Very-high-pressure experiments at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory suggest that the base of the mantle may comprise an ocean of liquid carbon with floating solid ` diamonds ' .
Neptune differs from Uranus in its typical level of meteorological activity .
Voyager 2 observed weather phenomena on Neptune during its 1989 flyby , but no comparable phenomena on Uranus during its 1986 fly-by .
This hypothesis of migration after formation is favoured , due to its ability to better explain the occupancy of the populations of small objects observed in the trans-Neptunian region .
The current most widely accepted explanation of the details of this hypothesis is known as the Nice model , which explores the effect of a migrating Neptune and the other giant planets on the structure of the Kuiper belt .
In 2013 the Maltese president described the Mediterranean sea as a `` cemetery '' due to the large amounts of migrants who drown there after their boats capsize .
European Parliament president Martin Schulz said that Europe 's migration policy has `` turned the Mediterranean into a graveyard '' , referring to the number of drowned refugees in the region as a direct result of the policies .
An Azerbaijani official described the sea as `` a burial ground ... where people die '' .
The near-completely enclosed configuration of the Mediterranean basin has enabled the oceanic gateways to dominate seawater circulation and the environmental evolution of the sea and basin .
Circulation patterns are also affected by several other factors -- including climate , bathymetry , and water chemistry and temperature -- which are interactive and can induce precipitation of evaporites .
Diatomites are regularly found underneath the evaporite deposits , suggesting a connection between their geneses .
In that regard , authorities around the Mediterranean have made it a point to extinguish rising man-made chaotic zones that would affect the economies , societies in neighboring coastal countries , let alone shipping routes .
Naval and rescue components in the Mediterranean Sea are considered one of the very best due to the quick intercooperation of various Naval Fleets within proximity of each other .
Unlike the vast open Oceans , the closed nature of the Mediterranean Sea provides a much more adaptable naval initiative among the coastal countries to provide effective naval and rescue missions , considered the safest and regardless of any man-made or natural disaster .
Tourism also supports small communities in coastal areas and islands by providing alternative sources of income far from urban centers .
However , tourism has also played major role in the degradation of the coastal and marine environment .
Rapid development has been encouraged by Mediterranean governments to support the large numbers of tourists visiting the region each year .
But this has caused serious disturbance to marine habitats such as erosion and pollution in many places along the Mediterranean coasts .
Tourism often concentrates in areas of high natural wealth , causing a serious threat to the habitats of endangered Mediterranean species such as sea turtles and monk seals .
Reductions in natural wealth may reduce incentives for tourists to visit .
Similar ascent is seen around tropical cyclones outside of the eyewall , and in comma-head precipitation patterns around mid-latitude cyclones .
A wide variety of weather can be found along an occluded front , with thunderstorms possible , but usually their passage is associated with a drying of the air mass .
Occluded fronts usually form around mature low-pressure areas .
What separates rainfall from other precipitation types , such as ice pellets and snow , is the presence of a thick layer of air aloft which is above the melting point of water , which melts the frozen precipitation well before it reaches the ground .
If there is a shallow near surface layer that is below freezing , freezing rain -LRB- rain which freezes on contact with surfaces in subfreezing environments -RRB- will result .
Hail becomes an increasingly infrequent occurrence when the freezing level within the atmosphere exceeds 3,400 m -LRB- 11,000 ft -RRB- above ground level .
The Quantitative Precipitation Forecast -LRB- abbreviated QPF -RRB- is the expected amount of liquid precipitation accumulated over a specified time period over a specified area .
A QPF will be specified when a measurable precipitation type reaching a minimum threshold is forecast for any hour during a QPF valid period .
Precipitation forecasts tend to be bound by synoptic hours such as 0000 , 0600 , 1200 and 1800 GMT .
Terrain is considered in QPFs by use of topography or based upon climatological precipitation patterns from observations with fine detail .
Starting in the mid to late 1990s , QPFs were used within hydrologic forecast models to simulate impact to rivers throughout the United States .
Forecast models show significant sensitivity to humidity levels within the planetary boundary layer , or in the lowest levels of the atmosphere , which decreases with height .
QPF can be generated on a quantitative , forecasting amounts , or a qualitative , forecasting the probability of a specific amount , basis .
Radar imagery forecasting techniques show higher skill than model forecasts within 6 to 7 hours of the time of the radar image .
The forecasts can be verified through use of rain gauge measurements , weather radar estimates , or a combination of both .
Various skill scores can be determined to measure the value of the rainfall forecast .
Approximately 505,000 km3 -LRB- 121,000 cu mi -RRB- of water falls as precipitation each year across the globe with 398,000 km3 -LRB- 95,000 cu mi -RRB- of it over the oceans .
Given the Earth 's surface area , that means the globally averaged annual precipitation is 990 mm -LRB- 39 in -RRB- .
Deserts are defined as areas with an average annual precipitation of less than 250 mm -LRB- 10 in -RRB- per year , or as areas where more water is lost by evapotranspiration than falls as precipitation .
There is generally a Christian religion established as the official church in each of these countries .
Luxembourg , which is very predominantly Roman Catholic , has five so-called officially recognised cults of national importance -LRB- Roman Catholicism , Protestantism , Greek Orthodoxy , Judaism and Islam -RRB- , a status which gives to those religions some privileges like the payment of a state salary to their priests .
Andorra is unique among all existing monarchies , as it is , by definition , a diarchy , with the Co-Princeship being shared by the President of France and the Bishop of Urgell .
This situation , based on historic precedence , has created a peculiar situation among monarchies , as a -RRB- both Co-Princes are not of Andorran descent , b -RRB- one is elected by common citizens of a foreign country -LRB- France -RRB- , but not by Andorrans as they can not vote in the French Presidential Elections , c -RRB- the other , the bishop of Urgel , is appointed by a foreign head of state , the Pope .
Five monarchies do not fit into one of the above groups by virtue of geography or class of monarchy : the Kingdom of Tonga in Polynesia ; the Kingdom of Swaziland and the Kingdom of Lesotho in Africa ; the Vatican City State ; the Sovereign Military Order of Malta in Europe .
The Kingdom of Swaziland is also unique among these monarchies , often being considered a diarchy .
The King , or Ngwenyama , rules alongside his mother , the Ndlovukati , as dual heads of state originally designed to be checks on political power .
The Ngwenyama , however , is considered the administrative head of state , while the Ndlovukati is considered the spiritual and national head of state , a position which more or less has become symbolic in recent years .
Since accurate measurement is essential in many fields , and since all measurements are necessarily approximations , a great deal of effort must be taken to make measurements as accurate as possible .
For example , consider the problem of measuring the time it takes an object to fall a distance of one metre -LRB- about 39 in -RRB- .
Using physics , it can be shown that , in the gravitational field of the Earth , it should take any object about 0.45 second to fall one metre .
Quantity and measurement are mutually defined : quantitative attributes are those possible to measure , at least in principle .
The classical concept of quantity can be traced back to John Wallis and Isaac Newton , and was foreshadowed in Euclid 's Elements .
Units of measurement are generally defined on a scientific basis , overseen by governmental or independent agencies , and established in international treaties , pre-eminent of which is the General Conference on Weights and Measures -LRB- CGPM -RRB- , established in 1875 by the Treaty of the metre and which oversees the International System of Units -LRB- SI -RRB- and which has custody of the International Prototype Kilogram .
The metre , for example , was redefined in 1983 by the CGPM as the distance traveled by light in free space in 1⁄299 ,792,458 of a second while in 1960 the international yard was defined by the governments of the United States , United Kingdom , Australia and South Africa as being exactly 0.9144 metres .
Marxists believe that a socialist society will be far better for the majority of the populace than its capitalist counterpart .
Prior to the Russian revolution of 1917 , Lenin wrote that `` The socialization of production is bound to lead to the conversion of the means of production into the property of society ... This conversion will directly result in an immense increase in productivity of labour , a reduction of working hours , and the replacement of the remnants , the ruins of small-scale , primitive , disunited production by collective and improved labour . ''
In addition , the nondirectional nature of metallic bonding is also thought to contribute significantly to the ductility of most metallic solids .
When the planes of an ionic bond slide past one another , the resultant change in location shifts ions of the same charge into close proximity , resulting in the cleavage of the crystal ; such shift is not observed in covalently bonded crystals where fracture and crystal fragmentation occurs .
Copper alloys have been known since prehistory -- bronze gave the Bronze Age its name -- and have many applications today , most importantly in electrical wiring .
The alloys of the other three metals have been developed relatively recently ; due to their chemical reactivity they require electrolytic extraction processes .
The alloys of aluminium , titanium and magnesium are valued for their high strength-to-weight ratios ; magnesium can also provide electromagnetic shielding .
The term `` ferrous '' is derived from the Latin word meaning `` containing iron '' .
This can include pure iron , such as wrought iron , or an alloy such as steel .
It is determined by applying a force to an object and measuring the acceleration that results from that force .
An object with small inertial mass will accelerate more than an object with large inertial mass when acted upon by the same force .
One says the body of greater mass has greater inertia .
In everyday usage , mass and `` weight '' are often used interchangeably .
For instance , a person 's weight may be stated as 75 kg .
But because of slight differences in the strength of the Earth 's gravitational field at different places , the distinction becomes important for measurements with a precision better than a few percent , and for places far from the surface of the Earth , such as in space or on other planets .
Conceptually , `` mass '' -LRB- measured in kilograms -RRB- refers to an intrinsic property of an object , whereas `` weight '' -LRB- measured in newtons -RRB- measures an object 's resistance to deviating from its natural course of free fall , which can be influenced by the nearby gravitational field .
The equivalence of inertial and gravitational masses is sometimes referred to as the `` Galilean equivalence principle '' or the `` weak equivalence principle '' .
The most important consequence of this equivalence principle applies to freely falling objects .
If the only force acting on the object comes from a gravitational field g , combining Newton 's second law and the gravitational law yields the acceleration
In 1600 AD , Johannes Kepler sought employment with Tycho Brahe , who had some of the most precise astronomical data available .
Using Brahe 's precise observations of the planet Mars , Kepler spent the next five years developing his own method for characterizing planetary motion .
In 1609 , Johannes Kepler published his three laws of planetary motion , explaining how the planets orbit the Sun .
In Kepler 's final planetary model , he described planetary orbits as following elliptical paths with the Sun at a focal point of the ellipse .
Kepler discovered that the square of the orbital period of each planet is directly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit , or equivalently , that the ratio of these two values is constant for all planets in the Solar System .
The sociology of culture concerns culture as manifested in society .
For sociologist Georg Simmel -LRB- 1858 -- 1918 -RRB- , culture referred to `` the cultivation of individuals through the agency of external forms which have been objectified in the course of history . ''
As such , culture in the sociological field can be defined as the ways of thinking , the ways of acting , and the material objects that together shape a people 's way of life .
Non-material culture refers to the non-physical ideas that individuals have about their culture , including values , belief systems , rules , norms , morals , language , organizations , and institutions , while material culture is the physical evidence of a culture in the objects and architecture they make or have made .
The term tends to be relevant only in archeological and anthropological studies , but it specifically means all material evidence which can be attributed to culture , past or present .
From the 1970s onward , Stuart Hall 's pioneering work , along with that of his colleagues Paul Willis , Dick Hebdige , Tony Jefferson , and Angela McRobbie , created an international intellectual movement .
As the field developed , it began to combine political economy , communication , sociology , social theory , literary theory , media theory , film/video studies , cultural anthropology , philosophy , museum studies , and art history to study cultural phenomena or cultural texts .
In this field researchers often concentrate on how particular phenomena relate to matters of ideology , nationality , ethnicity , social class , and/or gender .
Cultural studies is concerned with the meaning and practices of everyday life .
These practices comprise the ways people do particular things -LRB- such as watching television , or eating out -RRB- in a given culture .
It also studies the meanings and uses people attribute to various objects and practices .
Specifically , culture involves those meanings and practices held independently of reason .
Watching television in order to view a public perspective on a historical event should not be thought of as culture , unless referring to the medium of television itself , which may have been selected culturally ; however , schoolchildren watching television after school with their friends in order to `` fit in '' certainly qualifies , since there is no grounded reason for one 's participation in this practice .
The second covers the variables that represent the `` social orientation '' of societies , i.e. , the attitudes and lifestyles of their members .
These variables include gender egalitarianism , institutional collectivism , in-group collectivism and human orientation .
Philosopher Edward S. Casey -LRB- 1996 -RRB- describes : `` The very word culture meant ` place tilled ' in Middle English , and the same word goes back to Latin colere , ` to inhabit , care for , till , worship ' and cultus , ' A cult , especially a religious one . '
To be cultural , to have a culture , is to inhabit a place sufficiently intensive to cultivate it -- to be responsible for it , to respond to it , to attend to it caringly . ''
Transmission can occur when : body fluids are exchanged during sexual activity , e.g. , HIV ; blood is exchanged by contaminated transfusion or needle sharing , e.g. , hepatitis C ; exchange of saliva by mouth , e.g. , Epstein -- Barr virus ; contaminated food or water is ingested , e.g. , norovirus ; aerosols containing virions are inhaled , e.g. , influenza virus ; and insect vectors such as mosquitoes penetrate the skin of a host , e.g. , dengue .
The rate or speed of transmission of viral infections depends on factors that include population density , the number of susceptible individuals , -LRB- i.e. , those not immune -RRB- , the quality of healthcare and the weather .
Each R gene confers resistance to a particular virus by triggering localised areas of cell death around the infected cell , which can often be seen with the unaided eye as large spots .
This stops the infection from spreading .
When they are infected , plants often produce natural disinfectants that kill viruses , such as salicylic acid , nitric oxide , and reactive oxygen molecules .
Researchers from the Agricultural Research Service are taking advantage of protists as pathogens to control red imported fire ant -LRB- Solenopsis invicta -RRB- populations in Argentina .
Researchers have also been able to infect phorid fly parasitoids of the ant with the protist without harming the flies .
This turns the flies into a vector that can spreads the pathogenic protist between red fire ant colonies .
Unlike true fungi , the cell walls of oomycetes contain cellulose and lack chitin .
Slime molds lack a cell wall during the assimilative phase -LRB- except labyrinthulids , which have a wall of scales -RRB- , and ingest nutrients by ingestion -LRB- phagocytosis , except labyrinthulids -RRB- rather than absorption -LRB- osmotrophy , as fungi , labyrinthulids , oomycetes and hyphochytrids -RRB- .
Nonetheless , studies of the oomycetes and myxomycetes are still often included in mycology textbooks and primary research literature .
Many species produce metabolites that are major sources of pharmacologically active drugs .
Particularly important are the antibiotics , including the penicillins , a structurally related group of β-lactam antibiotics that are synthesized from small peptides .
Although naturally occurring penicillins such as penicillin G -LRB- produced by Penicillium chrysogenum -RRB- have a relatively narrow spectrum of biological activity , a wide range of other penicillins can be produced by chemical modification of the natural penicillins .
Modern penicillins are semisynthetic compounds , obtained initially from fermentation cultures , but then structurally altered for specific desirable properties .
Other antibiotics produced by fungi include : ciclosporin , commonly used as an immunosuppressant during transplant surgery ; and fusidic acid , used to help control infection from methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteria .
Widespread use of antibiotics for the treatment of bacterial diseases , such as tuberculosis , syphilis , leprosy , and others began in the early 20th century and continues to date .
In nature , antibiotics of fungal or bacterial origin appear to play a dual role : at high concentrations they act as chemical defense against competition with other microorganisms in species-rich environments , such as the rhizosphere , and at low concentrations as quorum-sensing molecules for intra - or interspecies signaling .
Other drugs produced by fungi include griseofulvin isolated from Penicillium griseofulvum , used to treat fungal infections , and statins -LRB- HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors -RRB- , used to inhibit cholesterol synthesis .
Examples of statins found in fungi include mevastatin from Penicillium citrinum and lovastatin from Aspergillus terreus and the oyster mushroom .
Although probable prokaryotic cell fossils date to almost 3.5 billion years ago , most prokaryotes do not have distinctive morphologies and fossil shapes can not be used to identify them as archaea .
Instead , chemical fossils of unique lipids are more informative because such compounds do not occur in other organisms .
Some publications suggest that archaeal or eukaryotic lipid remains are present in shales dating from 2.7 billion years ago ; such data have since been questioned .
Such lipids have also been detected in even older rocks from west Greenland .
The oldest such traces come from the Isua district , which include Earth 's oldest known sediments , formed 3.8 billion years ago .
The archaeal lineage may be the most ancient that exists on Earth .
Archaea flagella operate like bacterial flagella -- their long stalks are driven by rotatory motors at the base .
These motors are powered by the proton gradient across the membrane .
The two types of flagella evolved from different ancestors .
The bacterial flagellum shares a common ancestor with the type III secretion system , while archaeal flagella appear to have evolved from bacterial type IV pili .
In contrast to the bacterial flagellum , which is hollow and is assembled by subunits moving up the central pore to the tip of the flagella , archaeal flagella are synthesized by adding subunits at the base .
Despite this morphological similarity to bacteria , archaea possess genes and several metabolic pathways that are more closely related to those of eukaryotes , notably the enzymes involved in transcription and translation .
Other aspects of archaeal biochemistry are unique , such as their reliance on ether lipids in their cell membranes , including archaeols .
Salt-tolerant archaea -LRB- the Haloarchaea -RRB- use sunlight as an energy source , and other species of archaea fix carbon ; however , unlike plants and cyanobacteria , no known species of archaea does both .
Archaea reproduce asexually by binary fission , fragmentation , or budding ; unlike bacteria and eukaryotes , no known species forms spores .
Following protests during the movement in which 105 people lost their lives in clashes with the police , Bombay State was reorganised on linguistic lines on 1 May 1960 .
Gujarati-speaking areas of Bombay State were partitioned into the state of Gujarat .
Maharashtra State with Bombay as its capital was formed with the merger of Marathi-speaking areas of Bombay State , eight districts from Central Provinces and Berar , five districts from Hyderabad State , and numerous princely states enclosed between them .
As a memorial to the martyrs of the Samyukta Maharashtra movement , Flora Fountain was renamed as Hutatma Chowk -LRB- Martyr 's Square -RRB- , and a memorial was erected .
State and central government employees make up a large percentage of the city 's workforce .
Mumbai also has a large unskilled and semi-skilled self-employed population , who primarily earn their livelihood as hawkers , taxi drivers , mechanics and other such blue collar professions .
The port and shipping industry is well established , with Mumbai Port being one of the oldest and most significant ports in India .
Dharavi , in central Mumbai , has an increasingly large recycling industry , processing recyclable waste from other parts of the city ; the district has an estimated 15,000 single-room factories .
All executive powers are vested in the Municipal Commissioner who is an Indian Administrative Service -LRB- IAS -RRB- officer appointed by the state government .
Although the Municipal Corporation is the legislative body that lays down policies for the governance of the city , it is the Commissioner who is responsible for the execution of the policies .
The Commissioner is appointed for a fixed term as defined by state statute .
The powers of the Commissioner are those provided by statute and those delegated by the Corporation or the Standing Committee .
The Mumbai Suburban Railway , popularly referred to as Locals forms the backbone of the city 's transport system .
Mumbai 's suburban rail systems carried a total of 6.3 million passengers every day in 2007 .
The Mumbai rail network is spread at an expanse of 319 route kilometres .
191 rakes -LRB- train-sets -RRB- of 9 car and 12 car composition are utilised to run a total of 2,226 train services in the city .
The largest telephone service provider is the state-owned MTNL , which held a monopoly over fixed line and cellular services up until 2000 , and provides fixed line as well as mobile WLL services .
Mumbai , along with the area served by telephone exchanges in Navi Mumbai and Kalyan is classified as a Metro telecom circle .
Many of the above service providers also provide broadband internet and wireless internet access in Mumbai .
The Mumbai Heritage Conservation Committee -LRB- MHCC -RRB- , established in 1995 , formulates special regulations and by-laws to assist in the conservation of the city 's heritage structures .
On the West coast are former-textile mills being demolished and skyscrapers built on top .
Bollywood , the Hindi film industry based in Mumbai , produces around 150 -- 200 films every year .
This led filmmaking to new heights in terms of quality , cinematography and innovative story lines as well as technical advances such as special effects and animation .
Studios in Goregaon , including Film City , are the location for most movie sets .
The city also hosts the Marathi film industry which has seen increased popularity in recent years , and TV production companies .
Football is another popular sport in the city , with the FIFA World Cup and the English Premier League being followed widely .
In the Indian Super League , Mumbai City FC represents the city ; while in the I-League -LRB- matches in the city are played at the Cooperage Ground -RRB- , the city is represented by two teams : Mumbai FC and Air-India .
When the Elite Football League of India was introduced in August 2011 , Mumbai was noted as one of eight cities to be awarded a team for the inaugural season .
Named the Mumbai Gladiators , the team 's first season was played in Pune in late 2012 , and it will be Mumbai 's first professional American football franchise .
Matches in the city are played at the Mahindra Hockey Stadium .
Jordan Paper , a Western scholar and self-described polytheist , considers polytheism to be the normal state in human culture .
He argues that `` Even the Catholic Church shows polytheistic aspects with the ` worshipping ' of the saints . ''
On the other hand , he complains , monotheistic missionaries and scholars were eager to see a proto-monotheism or at least henotheism in polytheistic religions , for example , when taking from the Chinese pair of Sky and Earth only one part and calling it the King of Heaven , as Matteo Ricci did .
Smith wrote that as long as supply , demand , prices , and competition were left free of government regulation , the pursuit of material self-interest , rather than altruism , would maximise the wealth of a society through profit-driven production of goods and services .
An `` invisible hand '' directed individuals and firms to work toward the nation 's good as an unintended consequence of efforts to maximise their own gain .
This provided a moral justification for the accumulation of wealth , which had previously been viewed by some as sinful .
After 1945 , liberal democracies spread very quickly , but then retreated .
Diamond goes on to say that democracy bounced back and by 1995 the world was `` predominantly democratic '' .
Liberalism still faces challenges , especially with the phenomenal growth of China as a model combination of authoritarian government and economic liberalism .
The Great Recession , which began around 2007 , prompted a resurgence in Keynesian economic thought .
As part of the project to limit the powers of government , various liberal theorists such as James Madison and the Baron de Montesquieu conceived the notion of separation of powers , a system designed to equally distribute governmental authority among the executive , legislative , and judicial branches .
Governments had to realise , liberals maintained , that poor and improper governance gave the people authority to overthrow the ruling order through any and all possible means , even through outright violence and revolution , if needed .
Contemporary liberals , heavily influenced by social liberalism , have continued to support limited constitutional government while also advocating for state services and provisions to ensure equal rights .
Modern liberals claim that formal or official guarantees of individual rights are irrelevant when individuals lack the material means to benefit from those rights and call for a greater role for government in the administration of economic affairs .
Early liberals also laid the groundwork for the separation of church and state .
As heirs of the Enlightenment , liberals believed that any given social and political order emanated from human interactions , not from divine will .
Many liberals were openly hostile to religious belief itself , but most concentrated their opposition to the union of religious and political authority , arguing that faith could prosper on its own , without official sponsorship or administration by the state .
In the United Kingdom , the Liberal Party was founded in 1859 and was one of two major parties in British politics for that century , the other being the Conservative Party .
The party lost its influence in the early 20th century due to the growth of the Labour Party , and in 1988 it joined with the Labour splinter Social Democratic Party to form the Liberal Democrats .
Following the general election of 2010 , the Liberal Democrats formed a coalition government with the Conservatives , resulting in party leader Nick Clegg becoming the Deputy Prime minister and many other members becoming ministers .
However , the Liberal Democrats lost 49 of their 56 seats in the 2015 general election , with their review of the result concluding that a number of policy reversals were responsible for their poor electoral performance .
The early waves of liberalism popularised economic individualism while expanding constitutional government and parliamentary authority .
One of the greatest liberal triumphs involved replacing the capricious nature of royalist and absolutist rule with a decision-making process encoded in written law .
Liberals sought and established a constitutional order that prized important individual freedoms , such as the freedom of speech and of association , an independent judiciary and public trial by jury , and the abolition of aristocratic privileges .
The Great Depression has been the subject of much writing , as authors have sought to evaluate an era that caused both financial and emotional trauma .
Perhaps the most noteworthy and famous novel written on the subject is The Grapes of Wrath , published in 1939 and written by John Steinbeck , who was awarded both the Nobel Prize for literature and the Pulitzer Prize for the work .
The novel focuses on a poor family of sharecroppers who are forced from their home as drought , economic hardship , and changes in the agricultural industry occur during the Great Depression .
Additionally , Harper Lee 's To Kill a Mockingbird is set during the Great Depression .
Margaret Atwood 's Booker prize-winning The Blind Assassin is likewise set in the Great Depression , centering on a privileged socialite 's love affair with a Marxist revolutionary .
The era spurred the resurgence of social realism , practiced by many who started their writing careers on relief programs , especially the Federal Writers ' Project in the U.S.
1928 and 1929 were the times in the 20th century that the wealth gap reached such skewed extremes ; half the unemployed had been out of work for over six months , something that was not repeated until the late-2000s recession .
2007 and 2008 eventually saw the world reach new levels of wealth gap inequality that rivalled the years of 1928 and 1929 .
According to Rothbard , government support for failed enterprises and keeping wages above their market values actually prolonged the Depression .
Hayek , unlike Rothbard , believed since the 1970s , along with the monetarists , that the Federal Reserve further contributed to the problems of the Depression by permitting the money supply to shrink during the earliest years of the Depression .
However , in 1932 and 1934 Hayek had criticised the FED and the Bank of England for not taking a more contractionary stance .
Personal income , tax revenue , profits and prices dropped , while international trade plunged by more than 50 % .
Unemployment in the U.S. rose to 25 % and in some countries rose as high as 33 % .
The world financial crisis now began to overwhelm Britain ; investors across the world started withdrawing their gold from London at the rate of # 2 1/2 millions a day .
With deficits mounting , the bankers demanded a balanced budget ; the divided cabinet of Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald 's Labour government agreed ; it proposed to raise taxes , cut spending and most controversially , to cut unemployment benefits 20 % .
MacDonald wanted to resign , but King George V insisted he remain and form an all-party coalition `` National government . ''
The Conservative and Liberals parties signed on , along with a small cadre of Labour , but the vast majority of Labour leaders denounced MacDonald as a traitor for leading the new government .
Britain went off the gold standard , and suffered relatively less than other major countries in the Grade Depression .
In the 1931 British election the Labour Party was virtually destroyed , leaving MacDonald as Prime Minister for a largely Conservative coalition .
In rural and small-town areas , women expanded their operation of vegetable gardens to include as much food production as possible .
In the United States , agricultural organizations sponsored programs to teach housewives how to optimize their gardens and to raise poultry for meat and eggs .
In American cities , African American women quiltmakers enlarged their activities , promoted collaboration , and trained neophytes .
Quilts were created for practical use from various inexpensive materials and increased social interaction for women and promoted camaraderie and personal fulfillment .
Beef and dairy products comprised the bulk of exports , and Ireland fared well relative to many other commodity producers , particularly in the early years of the depression .
Already under the rule of a dictatorial junta , the Ditadura Nacional , Portugal suffered no turbulent political effects of the Depression , although António de Oliveira Salazar , already appointed Minister of Finance in 1928 greatly expanded his powers and in 1932 rose to Prime Minister of Portugal to found the Estado Novo , an authoritarian corporatist dictatorship .
With the budget balanced in 1929 , the effects of the depression were relaxed through harsh measures towards budget balance and autarky , causing social discontent but stability and , eventually , an impressive economic growth .
The world financial crisis began to overwhelm Britain in 1931 ; investors across the world started withdrawing their gold from London at the rate of # 2 1/2 millions a day .
The financial crisis now caused a major political crisis in Britain in August 1931 .
Impressed by her success , Snively arranged a contract for Monroe with an acting agency in June 1946 .
Head executive Darryl F. Zanuck was unenthusiastic about it , but he was persuaded to give her a standard six-month contract to avoid her being signed by rival studio RKO Pictures .
Monroe 's contract began in August 1946 , and together with Lyon selected the stage name `` Marilyn Monroe '' .
The first name was picked by Lyon , who was reminded of Broadway star Marilyn Miller ; the last was picked by Monroe after her mother 's maiden name .
Monroe began 1956 by announcing her win over 20th Century-Fox ; the press , which had previously derided her , now wrote favorably about her decision to fight the studio .
Time called her a `` shrewd businesswoman '' and Look predicted that the win would be `` an example of the individual against the herd for years to come '' .
Her relationship with Miller prompted some negative comments from the press , including Walter Winchell 's statement that `` America 's best-known blonde moving picture star is now the darling of the left-wing intelligentsia . ''
Monroe and Miller were married in a civil ceremony at the Westchester County Court in White Plains , New York on June 29 , and two days later had a Jewish ceremony at his agent 's house at Waccabuc , New York .
Monroe converted to Judaism with the marriage , which led Egypt to ban all of her films .
The media saw the union as mismatched given her star image as a sex symbol and his position as an intellectual , as demonstrated by Variety 's headline `` Egghead Weds Hourglass '' .
According to Lois Banner , `` it 's said that the suicide rate in Los Angeles doubled the month after she died ; the circulation rate of most newspapers expanded that month '' , and the Chicago Tribune reported that they had received hundreds of phone calls from members of the public requesting information about her death .
French artist Jean Cocteau commented that her death `` should serve as a terrible lesson to all those , whose chief occupation consists of spying on and tormenting film stars '' , her former co-star Laurence Olivier deemed her `` the complete victim of ballyhoo and sensation '' , and Bus Stop director Joshua Logan stated that she was `` one of the most unappreciated people in the world '' .
Her funeral , held at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery on August 8 , was private and attended by only her closest associates .
The service was arranged by Joe DiMaggio and her business manager Inez Melson .
Hundreds of spectators crowded the streets around the cemetery .
Monroe was later interred at crypt No. 24 at the Corridor of Memories .
The Greater Middle East was a political term coined by the second Bush administration in the first decade of the 21st century , to denote various countries , pertaining to the Muslim world , specifically Iran , Turkey , Afghanistan and Pakistan .
Various Central Asian countries are sometimes also included .
Arabic , with all its dialects , are the most widely spoken languages in the Middle East , with Literary Arabic being official in all North African and in most West Asian countries .
Arabic dialects are also spoken in some adjacent areas in neighbouring Middle Eastern non-Arab countries .
Until World War II , it was customary to refer to areas centered around Turkey and the eastern shore of the Mediterranean as the `` Near East '' , while the `` Far East '' centered on China , and the Middle East then meant the area from Mesopotamia to Burma , namely the area between the Near East and the Far East .
In the late 1930s , the British established the Middle East Command , which was based in Cairo , for its military forces in the region .
After that time , the term `` Middle East '' gained broader usage in Europe and the United States , with the Middle East Institute founded in Washington , D.C. in 1946 , among other usage .
Liquid water can not persist on the lunar surface .
When exposed to solar radiation , water quickly decomposes through a process known as photodissociation and is lost to space .
However , since the 1960s , scientists have hypothesized that water ice may be deposited by impacting comets or possibly produced by the reaction of oxygen-rich lunar rocks , and hydrogen from solar wind , leaving traces of water which could possibly survive in cold , permanently shadowed craters at either pole on the Moon .
Computer simulations suggest that up to 14,000 km2 -LRB- 5,400 sq mi -RRB- of the surface may be in permanent shadow .
The presence of usable quantities of water on the Moon is an important factor in rendering lunar habitation as a cost-effective plan ; the alternative of transporting water from Earth would be prohibitively expensive .
While gravitation causes acceleration and movement of the Earth 's fluid oceans , gravitational coupling between the Moon and Earth 's solid body is mostly elastic and plastic .
The result is a further tidal effect of the Moon on the Earth that causes a bulge of the solid portion of the Earth nearest the Moon that acts as a torque in opposition to the Earth 's rotation .
This `` drains '' angular momentum and rotational kinetic energy from Earth 's spin , slowing the Earth 's rotation .
That angular momentum , lost from the Earth , is transferred to the Moon in a process -LRB- confusingly known as tidal acceleration -RRB- , which lifts the Moon into a higher orbit and results in its lower orbital speed about the Earth .
Thus the distance between Earth and Moon is increasing , and the Earth 's spin is slowing in reaction .
Measurements from laser reflectors left during the Apollo missions -LRB- lunar ranging experiments -RRB- have found that the Moon 's distance increases by 38 mm -LRB- 1.5 in -RRB- per year -LRB- roughly the rate at which human fingernails grow -RRB- .
Atomic clocks also show that Earth 's day lengthens by about 15 microseconds every year , slowly increasing the rate at which UTC is adjusted by leap seconds .
Left to run its course , this tidal drag would continue until the spin of Earth and the orbital period of the Moon matched , creating mutual tidal locking between the two .
As a result , the Moon would be suspended in the sky over one meridian , as is already currently the case with Pluto and its moon Charon .
However , the Sun will become a red giant engulfing the Earth-Moon system long before this occurrence .
Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon as the commander of the American mission Apollo 11 by first setting foot on the Moon at 02:56 UTC on 21 July 1969 .
An estimated 500 million people worldwide watched the transmission by the Apollo TV camera , the largest television audience for a live broadcast at that time .
The Apollo missions 11 to 17 -LRB- except Apollo 13 , which aborted its planned lunar landing -RRB- returned 380.05 kilograms -LRB- 837.87 lb -RRB- of lunar rock and soil in 2,196 separate samples .
The American Moon landing and return was enabled by considerable technological advances in the early 1960s , in domains such as ablation chemistry , software engineering and atmospheric re-entry technology , and by highly competent management of the enormous technical undertaking .
Several mechanisms have been proposed for the Moon 's formation 4.51 billion years ago , and some 60 million years after the origin of the Solar System .
These mechanisms included the fission of the Moon from Earth 's crust through centrifugal force -LRB- which would require too great an initial spin of Earth -RRB- , the gravitational capture of a pre-formed Moon -LRB- which would require an unfeasibly extended atmosphere of Earth to dissipate the energy of the passing Moon -RRB- , and the co-formation of Earth and the Moon together in the primordial accretion disk -LRB- which does not explain the depletion of metals in the Moon -RRB- .
These hypotheses also can not account for the high angular momentum of the Earth -- Moon system .
In polygynous species , males will try to monopolize and mate with multiple females .
As with monogamy , polygyny in rodents can come in two forms ; defense and non-defense .
Defense polygyny involves males controlling territories that contain resources that attract females .
Males with territories are known as `` resident '' males and the females that live within the territories are known as `` resident '' females .
In the case of marmots , resident males do not appear to ever lose their territories and always win encounters with invading males .
Some species are also known to directly defend their resident females and the ensuing fights can lead to severe wounding .
In species with non-defense polygyny , males are not territorial and wander widely in search of females to monopolize .
These males establish dominance hierarchies , with the high-ranking males having access to the most females .
This occurs in species like Belding 's ground squirrels and some tree squirrel species .
Rodents are thought to have evolved in Asia , where local multituberculate faunas were severely affected by the Cretaceous -- Paleogene extinction event and never fully recovered , unlike their North American and European relatives .
In the resulting ecological vacuum , rodents and other Glires were allowed to evolve and diversify , taking the niches left by extinct multituberculates .
The correlation between the spread of rodents and the demise of multituberculates is a controversial topic , not fully resolved .
American and European multituberculate assemblages do decline in diversity in correlation with the introduction of rodents in these areas , but the remaining Asian multituberculates co-existed with rodents with no observable replacement taking place , and ultimately both clades co-existed for at least 15 million years .
At least 89 species of rodent , mostly Hystricomorpha such as guinea pigs , agoutis and capybaras , are eaten by humans ; in 1985 , there were at least 42 different societies in which people eat rats .
Guinea pigs were first raised for food around 2500 B.C. and by 1500 B.C. had become the main source of meat for the Inca Empire .
Dormice were raised by the Romans in special pots called `` gliraria '' , or in large outdoor enclosures , where they were fattened on walnuts , chestnuts , and acorns .
The dormice were also caught from the wild in autumn when they were fattest , and either roasted and dipped into honey or baked while stuffed with a mixture of pork , pine nuts , and other flavorings .
Researchers found that in Amazonia , where large mammals were scarce , pacas and common agoutis accounted for around 40 percent of the annual game taken by the indigenous people , but in forested areas where larger mammals were abundant , these rodents constituted only about 3 percent of the take .
The Myomorpha , such as the brown rat , have enlarged temporalis muscles , making them able to chew powerfully with their molars .
The Hystricomorpha , such as the guinea pig , have larger superficial masseter muscles and smaller deep masseter muscles than rats or squirrels , possibly making them less efficient at biting with the incisors , but their enlarged internal pterygoid muscles may allow them to move the jaw further sideways when chewing .
While the largest species , the capybara , can weigh as much as 66 kg -LRB- 146 lb -RRB- , most rodents weigh less than 100 g -LRB- 3.5 oz -RRB- .
The smallest rodent is the Baluchistan pygmy jerboa , which averages only 4.4 cm -LRB- 1.7 in -RRB- in head and body length , with adult females weighing only 3.75 g -LRB- 0.132 oz -RRB- .
The tail is sometimes used for communication , as when beavers slap their tails on the water surface or house mice rattle their tails to indicate alarm .
The fore limbs usually have five digits , including an opposable thumb , while the hind limbs have three to five digits .
The elbow gives the fore arms great flexibility .
The nails of burrowing species tend to be long and strong , while arboreal rodents have shorter , sharper nails .
Rodent species use a wide variety of methods of locomotion including quadrupedal walking , running , burrowing , and climbing , bipedal hopping -LRB- kangaroo rats and hopping mice -RRB- , swimming , and even gliding .
Scaly-tailed squirrels and flying squirrels , although not closely related , can both glide from tree to tree using parachute-like membranes that stretch from the fore to the hind limbs .
Shah Ismail I was also deeply influenced by the Persian literary tradition of Iran , particularly by the Shahnameh , which probably explains the fact that he named all of his sons after Shahnameh characters .
Dickson and Welch suggest that Ismail 's Shāhnāmaye Shāhī was intended as a present to the young Tahmāsp .
After defeating Muhammad Shaybāni 's Uzbeks , Ismāil asked Hātefī , a famous poet from Jam -LRB- Khorasan -RRB- , to write a Shahnameh-like epic about his victories and his newly established dynasty .
Although the epic was left unfinished , it was an example of mathnawis in the heroic style of the Shahnameh written later on for the Safavid kings .
Anvari remarked about the eloquence of the Shahnameh , `` He was not just a Teacher and we his students .
Although memory has traditionally been a persistent theme in philosophy , the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries also saw the study of memory emerge as a subject of inquiry within the paradigms of cognitive psychology .
In recent decades , it has become one of the pillars of a new branch of science called cognitive neuroscience , a marriage between cognitive psychology and neuroscience .
In 1950 Alan M. Turing published `` Computing machinery and intelligence '' in Mind , in which he proposed that machines could be tested for intelligence using questions and answers .
This process is now named the Turing Test .
The term Artificial Intelligence -LRB- AI -RRB- was first used by John McCarthy who considered it to mean `` the science and engineering of making intelligent machines '' .
It can also refer to intelligence as exhibited by an artificial -LRB- man-made , non-natural , manufactured -RRB- entity .
AI is studied in overlapping fields of computer science , psychology , neuroscience and engineering , dealing with intelligent behavior , learning and adaptation and usually developed using customized machines or computers .
Buddhist teachings explain the moment-to-moment manifestation of the mind-stream .
The components that make up the mind are known as the five aggregates -LRB- i.e. , material form , feelings , perception , volition , and sensory consciousness -RRB- , which arise and pass away continuously .
The arising and passing of these aggregates in the present moment is described as being influenced by five causal laws : biological laws , psychological laws , physical laws , volitional laws , and universal laws .
The Buddhist practice of mindfulness involves attending to this constantly changing mind-stream .
Thinking is sometimes described as a `` higher '' cognitive function and the analysis of thinking processes is a part of cognitive psychology .
-LRB- 6 -RRB- Hector rallies the Trojans and prevents a rout ; the Greek Diomedes and the Trojan Glaukos find common ground and exchange unequal gifts .
Hector enters the city , urges prayers and sacrifices , incites Paris to battle , bids his wife Andromache and son Astyanax farewell on the city walls , and rejoins the battle .
-LRB- 11 -RRB- In the morning , the fighting is fierce , and Agamemnon , Diomedes , and Odysseus are all wounded .
Achilles sends Patroclus from his camp to inquire about the Greek casualties , and while there Patroclus is moved to pity by a speech of Nestor 's .
Although Homer 's depictions are graphic , it can be seen in the very end that victory in war is a far more somber occasion , where all that is lost becomes apparent .
William Shakespeare used the plot of the Iliad as source material for his play Troilus and Cressida , but focused on a medieval legend , the love story of Troilus , son of King Priam of Troy , and Cressida , daughter of the Trojan soothsayer Calchas .
The play , often considered to be a comedy , reverses traditional views on events of the Trojan War and depicts Achilles as a coward , Ajax as a dull , unthinking mercenary , etc. .
The Rage of Achilles by American author and Yale Writers ' Conference founder Terence Hawkins recounts the Iliad as a novel in modern , sometimes graphic language .
Informed by Julian Jaynes ' theory of the bicameral mind and the historicity of the Trojan War , it depicts its characters as real men to whom the gods appear only as hallucinations or command voices during the sudden and painful transition to truly modern consciousness .
Odysseus confronts and beats Thersites , a common soldier who voices discontent about fighting Agamemnon 's war .
After a meal , the Greeks deploy in companies upon the Trojan plain .
The poet takes the opportunity to describe the provenance of each Greek contingent .
While April 23 , 1616 was recorded as the date of his death in some references , and is the date on which his death is widely commemorated -LRB- along with that of William Shakespeare -RRB- , Cervantes in fact died in Madrid the previous day , April 22 .
He was buried on 23 April .
The cause of his death , according to Antonio López Alonso , a modern physician who has examined the surviving documentation , was type-2 diabetes , a result of a cirrhosis of the liver .
The cirrhosis was not caused by alcoholism ; Cervantes was too productive , especially in his final years , to have been an alcoholic .
Don Quixote -LRB- spelled `` Quijote '' in modern Spanish -RRB- is two separate volumes , now nearly always published as one , that cover the adventures of Don Quixote de la Mancha , a hero who carries his enthusiasm and self-deception to unintentional and comic ends .
On one level , Don Quixote works as a satire of the romances of chivalry , which , though still popular in Cervantes ' time , had become an object of ridicule among more demanding critics .
The choice of a madman as hero also served a critical purpose , for it was `` the impression of ill-being or ` in-sanity , ' rather than a finding of dementia or psychosis in clinical terms , that defined the madman for Cervantes and his contemporaries . ''
Indeed , the concept of madness was `` associated with physical or moral displacement , as may be seen in the literal and figurative sense of the adjectives eccentric , extravagant , deviant , aberrant , etc. '' The novel allows Cervantes to illuminate various aspects of human nature .
Because the novel , particularly the first part , was written in individually published sections , the composition includes several incongruities .
Cervantes pointed out some of these errors in the preface to the second part ; but he disdained to correct them , because he conceived that they had been too severely condemned by his critics .
Cervantes felt a passion for the vivid painting of character .
He is paired with a character of opposite qualities , Sancho Panza , a man of low self-esteem , who is a compound of grossness and simplicity .
These plays and entremeses made up Ocho Comedias y ocho entire messes nuevos , nunca representados -LRB- Eight Comedies and Eight New Interludes , Never Before Performed -RRB- which appeared in 1615 .
Cervantes included some of his dramas among the works he was most satisfied with .
In Ancient Judaism , his fourth major work on the sociology of religion , Weber attempted to explain the factors that resulted in the early differences between Oriental and Occidental religiosity .
He contrasted the innerworldly asceticism developed by Western Christianity with mystical contemplation of the kind developed in India .
Weber noted that some aspects of Christianity sought to conquer and change the world , rather than withdraw from its imperfections .
This fundamental characteristic of Christianity -LRB- when compared to Far Eastern religions -RRB- stems originally from ancient Jewish prophecy .
These two theodicies can be found in the denominational segregation within the religious community .
The main division can be seen between the mainline Protestant and evangelical denominations and their relation to the class into which their particular theodicy pertains .
For example , mainline churches , with their upper class congregations , `` promote -LSB- d -RSB- order , stability , and conservatism , and in so doing proved to be a powerful source of legitimation of the status quo and of existing disparities in the distribution of wealth and power '' because much of the wealth of the church comes from the congregation .
In contrast , Pentecostal churches adopted the theodicy of misfortune .
They instead `` advocated change intended to advance the cause of justice and fairness '' .
Thus the learned and upper class religious churches who preach the theodicy of fortune , ultimately support capitalism and corporation , while the churches who adopted the theodicy of misfortune , instead preached equality and fairness .
The origin of a rational and inner-worldly ethic is associated in the Occident with the appearance of thinkers and prophets -LSB- ... -RSB- who developed in a social context that was alien to the Asiatic cultures .
This context consisted of the political problems engendered by the bourgeois status-group of the city , without which neither Judaism , nor Christianity , nor the development of Hellenistic thinking are conceivable .
Also during the 20th century , a number of martial arts were adapted for self-defense purposes for military hand-to-hand combat .
The US military de-emphasized hand-to-hand combat training during the Cold War period , but revived it with the introduction of LINE in 1989 .
Full-contact sparring or competition , where strikes are not pulled but thrown with full force as the name implies , has a number of tactical differences from light and medium-contact sparring .
Monotheism has been defined as the belief in the existence of only one god that created the world , is all-powerful and interferes in the world .
A distinction may be made between exclusive monotheism , and both inclusive monotheism and pluriform -LRB- panentheistic -RRB- monotheism which , while recognising various distinct gods , postulate some underlying unity .
Islam emerged in the 7th century CE in the context of both Christianity and Judaism , with some thematic elements similar to Gnosticism .
Islamic belief states that Muhammad did not bring a new religion from God , but is rather the same religion as practiced by Abraham , Moses , David , Jesus and all the other prophets of God .
The assertion of Islam is that the message of God had been corrupted , distorted or lost over time and the Quran was sent to Muhammad in order to correct the lost message of the Torah , New Testament and prior scriptures from God .
In speaking of Henotheism , Indo-European religions have had shifting tendencies regarding their supreme god .
Consider the ruler of lightning : the supreme god Zeus , Perun , Jupiter controlled lightning himself ; while in Norse mythology Odin delegated the power of lightning to his son Thor .
In this vein , phenomena controlled by any single henotheistic god differ widely among various Indo-European religions .
This does not mean one as in one of a pair , nor one like a species -LRB- which encompasses many individuals -RRB- , nor one as in an object that is made up of many elements , nor as a single simple object that is infinitely divisible .
In their 832-page biography , Mao : The Unknown Story , Jung Chang and Jon Halliday take a very critical view of Mao 's life and influence .
For example , they note that Mao was well aware that his policies would be responsible for the deaths of millions ; While discussing labour-intensive projects such as waterworks and making steel , Mao said to his inner circle in November 1958 : `` Working like this , with all these projects , half of China may well have to die .
In his first school year , Mao befriended an older student , Xiao Zisheng ; together they went on a walking tour of Hunan , begging and writing literary couplets to obtain food .
A popular student , in 1915 Mao was elected secretary of the Students Society .
In spring 1917 , he was elected to command the students ' volunteer army , set up to defend the school from marauding soldiers .
Mao undertook feats of physical endurance with Xiao Zisheng and Cai Hesen , and with other young revolutionaries they formed the Renovation of the People Study Society in April 1918 to debate Chen Duxiu 's ideas .
Desiring personal and societal transformation , the Society gained 70 -- 80 members , many of whom would later join the Communist Party .
Mao graduated in June 1919 , ranked third in the year .
In the mid-1990s , Mao Zedong 's picture began to appear on all new renminbi -LRB- 人民幣 -RRB- currency from the People 's Republic of China .
This was officially instituted as an anti-counterfeiting measure as Mao 's face is widely recognised in contrast to the generic figures that appear in older currency .
On March 13 , 2006 , a story in the People 's Daily reported that a proposal had been made to print the portraits of Sun Yat-sen and Deng Xiaoping .
Paid a low wage , Mao lived in a cramped room with seven other Hunanese students , but believed that Beijing 's beauty offered `` vivid and living compensation '' .
At the university , Mao was widely snubbed by other students due to his rural Hunanese accent and lowly position .
Mao 's time in Beijing ended in the spring of 1919 , when he travelled to Shanghai with friends who were preparing to leave for France .
She died in October 1919 , with her husband dying in January 1920 .
Having grown up in Hunan , Mao spoke Mandarin with a marked Hunanese accent .
Ross Terrill noted Mao was a `` son of the soil ... rural and unsophisticated '' in origins , while Clare Hollingworth asserted he was proud of his `` peasant ways and manners '' , having a strong Hunanese accent and providing `` earthy '' comments on sexual matters .
Lee Feigon noted that Mao 's `` earthiness '' meant that he remained connected to `` everyday Chinese life . ''
Fresh from the success of the Northern Expedition against the warlords , Chiang turned on the Communists , who by now numbered in the tens of thousands across China .
Chiang ignored the orders of the Wuhan-based left KMT government and marched on Shanghai , a city controlled by Communist militias .
As the Communists awaited Chiang 's arrival , he loosed the White Terror , massacring 5000 with the aid of the Green Gang .
In Beijing , 19 leading Communists were killed by Zhang Zuolin .
That May , tens of thousands of Communists and those suspected of being communists were killed , and the CPC lost approximately 15,000 of its 25,000 members .
In February 1930 , Mao created the Southwest Jiangxi Provincial Soviet Government in the region under his control .
In November , he suffered emotional trauma after his wife and sister were captured and beheaded by KMT general He Jian .
Mao then married He Zizhen , an 18-year-old revolutionary who bore him five children over the following nine years .
Facing internal problems , members of the Jiangxi Soviet accused him of being too moderate , and hence anti-revolutionary .
In December , they tried to overthrow Mao , resulting in the Futian incident , during which Mao 's loyalists tortured many and executed between 2000 and 3000 dissenters .
The CPC Central Committee moved to Jiangxi which it saw as a secure area .
Although he was proclaimed Chairman of the Council of People 's Commissars , Mao 's power was diminished , as his control of the Red Army was allocated to Zhou Enlai .
Meanwhile , Mao recovered from tuberculosis .
From Zunyi , Mao led his troops to Loushan Pass , where they faced armed opposition but successfully crossed the river .
Chiang flew into the area to lead his armies against Mao , but the Communists outmanoeuvred him and crossed the Jinsha River .
From this point onward , Mao was the Communist Party 's undisputed leader , even though he would not become party chairman until 1943 .
Faced with the more difficult task of crossing the Tatu River , they managed it by fighting a battle over the Luding Bridge in May , taking Luding .
Zhang and Mao disagreed over what to do ; the latter wished to proceed to Shaanxi , while Zhang wanted to retreat east to Tibet or Sikkim , far from the KMT threat .
It was agreed that they would go their separate ways , with Zhu De joining Zhang .
Mao 's forces proceeded north , through hundreds of miles of Grasslands , an area of quagmire where they were attacked by Manchu tribesman and where many soldiers succumbed to famine and disease .
Finally reaching Shaanxi , they fought off both the KMT and an Islamic cavalry militia before crossing the Min Mountains and Mount Liupan and reaching the Shenshi Soviet ; only 7-8000 had survived .
The Long March cemented Mao 's status as the dominant figure in the party .
In late autumn 1958 , Mao Zedong strongly condemned widespread practices of the Great Leap Forward -LRB- GLF -RRB- such as subjecting peasants to exhausting labour without adequate food and rest , which had resulted in epidemics , starvation and deaths .
At that time Mao explicitly recognized that anti-rightist pressures on officialdom were a major cause of `` production at the expense of livelihood . ''
While he was not willing to acknowledge that only abandonment of the GLF could solve these problems , he did strongly demand that they be addressed .
After the July 1959 clash at Lushan with Peng Dehuai , Mao revived the GLF in the context of a new , extremely harsh anti-rightist campaign , which he relentlessly promoted into the spring of 1960 together with the radical policies that he previously condemned .
Not until spring 1960 did Mao again express concern about abnormal deaths and other abuses , but he failed to apply the pressure needed to stop them .
Given what he had already learned about the costs to the peasants of GLF extremism , the Chairman should have known that the revival of GLF radicalism would exact a similar or even bigger price .
The worst of the famine was steered towards enemies of the state .
At a large Communist Party conference in Beijing in January 1962 , called the `` Conference of the Seven Thousand '' , State Chairman Liu Shaoqi denounced the Great Leap Forward as responsible for widespread famine .
The overwhelming majority of delegates expressed agreement , but Defense Minister Lin Biao staunchly defended Mao .
A brief period of liberalization followed while Mao and Lin plotted a comeback .
Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping rescued the economy by disbanding the people 's communes , introducing elements of private control of peasant smallholdings and importing grain from Canada and Australia to mitigate the worst effects of famine .
The split helped to determine the framework of the Second Cold War in general , and influenced the course of the Second Vietnam War in particular .
Though the Chinese Communist Party , which Mao led to power , has rejected in practice the economic fundamentals of much of Mao 's ideology , it retains for itself many of the powers established under Mao 's reign : it controls the Chinese army , police , courts and media and does not permit multi-party elections at the national or local level , except in Hong Kong .
Thus it is difficult to gauge the true extent of support for the Chinese Communist Party and Mao 's legacy within mainland China .
For its part , the Chinese government continues to officially regard Mao as a national hero .
On December 25 , 2008 , China opened the Mao Zedong Square to visitors in his home town of central Hunan Province to mark the 115th anniversary of his birth .
The People 's Republic of China under Mao exhibited the oppressive tendencies that were discernible in all the major absolutist regimes of the twentieth century .
Each of these regimes witnessed deliberately ordered mass ` cleansing ' and extermination .
The earliest development of classical mechanics is often referred to as Newtonian mechanics , and is associated with the physical concepts employed by and the mathematical methods invented by Newton , Leibniz , and others .
Later , more abstract and general methods were developed , leading to reformulations of classical mechanics known as Lagrangian mechanics and Hamiltonian mechanics .
These advances were largely made in the 18th and 19th centuries , and they extend substantially beyond Newton 's work , particularly through their use of analytical mechanics .
The following introduces the basic concepts of classical mechanics .
The motion of a point particle is characterized by a small number of parameters : its position , mass , and the forces applied to it .
Each of these parameters is discussed in turn .
In his Against Apion , the first-century AD historian Josephus discussed the synchronism between the Biblical account of the Exodus of the Israelites from Egypt and two Exodus-like events that the Egyptian historian Manetho apparently mentions .
It is difficult to distinguish between what Manetho himself recounted , and how Josephus or Apion interpret him .
Josephus identifies the Israelite Exodus with the first exodus mentioned by Manetho , when some 480,000 Hyksos `` shepherd kings '' -LRB- also referred to as just ` shepherds ' , as ` kings ' and as ` captive shepherds ' in his discussion of Manetho -RRB- left Egypt for Jerusalem .
Some geologists are now also researching a possible link between the eruption of Santorini -LRB- c. 1600 BC -RRB- and the events mentioned in the Exodus narrative in the Bible .
The six-continent combined-America model is used in France and its former colonies , Italy , Portugal , Spain , Romania , Latin America , and Greece.A five-continent model is obtained from this model by excluding Antarctica as uninhabited .
From the 16th century the English noun continent was derived from the term continent land , meaning continuous or connected land and translated from the Latin terra continens .
The noun was used to mean `` a connected or continuous tract of land '' or mainland .
The word continent was used in translating Greek and Latin writings about the three `` parts '' of the world , although in the original languages no word of exactly the same meaning as continent was used .
Antarctica was sighted in 1820 and described as a continent by Charles Wilkes on the United States Exploring Expedition in 1838 , the last continent identified , although a great `` Antarctic '' -LRB- antipodean -RRB- landmass had been anticipated for millennia .
Film is considered by many to be an important art form ; films entertain , educate , enlighten , and inspire audiences .
Any film can become a worldwide attraction , especially with the addition of dubbing or subtitles that translate the film message .
Films are also artifacts created by specific cultures , which reflect those cultures , and , in turn , affect them .
Radio and television programs are distributed over frequency bands that in the United States are highly regulated .
Such regulation includes determination of the width of the bands , range , licensing , types of receivers and transmitters used , and acceptable content .
The level of the Caspian has fallen and risen , often rapidly , many times over the centuries .
Some Russian historians claim that a medieval rising of the Caspian , perhaps caused by the Amu Darya changing its inflow to the Caspian from the 13th century to the 16th century , caused the coastal towns of Khazaria , such as Atil , to flood .
Overfishing has depleted a number of the historic fisheries .
In recent years , overfishing has threatened the sturgeon population to the point that environmentalists advocate banning sturgeon fishing completely until the population recovers .
The high price of sturgeon caviar , however , allows fishermen to afford bribes to ensure the authorities look the other way , making regulations in many locations ineffective .
Caviar harvesting further endangers the fish stocks , since it targets reproductive females .
Smooth plains are widespread flat areas that fill depressions of various sizes and bear a strong resemblance to the lunar maria .
Notably , they fill a wide ring surrounding the Caloris Basin .
Despite a lack of unequivocally volcanic characteristics , the localisation and rounded , lobate shape of these plains strongly support volcanic origins .
All the smooth plains of Mercury formed significantly later than the Caloris basin , as evidenced by appreciably smaller crater densities than on the Caloris ejecta blanket .
The floor of the Caloris Basin is filled by a geologically distinct flat plain , broken up by ridges and fractures in a roughly polygonal pattern .
It is not clear whether they are volcanic lavas induced by the impact , or a large sheet of impact melt .
This is because Mercury 's maximum possible elongations west of the Sun always occur when it is early autumn in the Southern Hemisphere , whereas its maximum possible eastern elongations happen during late winter in the Southern Hemisphere .
In both of these cases , the angle Mercury strikes with the ecliptic is maximized , allowing it to rise several hours before the Sun in the former instance and not set until several hours after sundown in the latter in countries located at southern temperate zone latitudes , such as Argentina and South Africa .
The Roman-Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy wrote about the possibility of planetary transits across the face of the Sun in his work Planetary Hypotheses .
He suggested that no transits had been observed either because planets such as Mercury were too small to see , or because the transits were too infrequent .
In medieval Islamic astronomy , the Andalusian astronomer Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī in the 11th century described the deferent of Mercury 's geocentric orbit as being oval , like an egg or a pignon , although this insight did not influence his astronomical theory or his astronomical calculations .
In the 12th century , Ibn Bajjah observed `` two planets as black spots on the face of the Sun '' , which was later suggested as the transit of Mercury and/or Venus by the Maragha astronomer Qotb al-Din Shirazi in the 13th century .
-LRB- Note that most such medieval reports of transits were later taken as observations of sunspots . -RRB-
The potential energy liberated by moving down the Sun 's potential well becomes kinetic energy ; requiring another large delta-v change to do anything other than rapidly pass by Mercury .
To land safely or enter a stable orbit the spacecraft would rely entirely on rocket motors .
Aerobraking is ruled out because Mercury has a negligible atmosphere .
A trip to Mercury requires more rocket fuel than that required to escape the Solar System completely .
A proposed alternative approach would use a solar sail to attain a Mercury-synchronous orbit around the Sun .
Alternatively , Mercury may have formed from the solar nebula before the Sun 's energy output had stabilized .
It would initially have had twice its present mass , but as the protosun contracted , temperatures near Mercury could have been between 2,500 and 3,500 K and possibly even as high as 10,000 K. Much of Mercury 's surface rock could have been vaporized at such temperatures , forming an atmosphere of `` rock vapor '' that could have been carried away by the solar wind .
The mammary gland is thought to have derived from apocrine skin glands .
Much of the argument is based on monotremes -LRB- egg-laying mammals -RRB- .
This secretion gradually became more copious and accrued nutritional complexity over evolutionary time .
However , all three use the movement of actin against myosin to create contraction .
In skeletal muscle , contraction is stimulated by electrical impulses transmitted by the nerves , the motoneurons -LRB- motor nerves -RRB- in particular .
Cardiac and smooth muscle contractions are stimulated by internal pacemaker cells which regularly contract , and propagate contractions to other muscle cells they are in contact with .
All skeletal muscle and many smooth muscle contractions are facilitated by the neurotransmitter acetylcholine .
In ordinary parlance , muscular `` strength '' usually refers to the ability to exert a force on an external object -- for example , lifting a weight .
What distinguishes the masseter is not anything special about the muscle itself , but its advantage in working against a much shorter lever arm than other muscles .
Because muscle strength is determined by cross-sectional area , a shorter muscle will be stronger `` pound for pound '' -LRB- i.e. , by weight -RRB- than a longer muscle of the same cross-sectional area .
At the time when an infant is delivered , the entire human uterus weighs about 1.1 kg -LRB- 40 oz -RRB- .
During childbirth , the uterus exerts 100 to 400 N -LRB- 25 to 100 lbf -RRB- of downward force with each contraction .
The presence of lactic acid has an inhibitory effect on ATP generation within the muscle ; though not producing fatigue , it can inhibit or even stop performance if the intracellular concentration becomes too high .
However , long-term training causes neovascularization within the muscle , increasing the ability to move waste products out of the muscles and maintain contraction .
Once moved out of muscles with high concentrations within the sarcomere , lactic acid can be used by other muscles or body tissues as a source of energy , or transported to the liver where it is converted back to pyruvate .
In addition to increasing the level of lactic acid , strenuous exercise causes the loss of potassium ions in muscle and causing an increase in potassium ion concentrations close to the muscle fibres , in the interstitium .
Acidification by lactic acid may allow recovery of force so that acidosis may protect against fatigue rather than being a cause of fatigue .
In some societies , the very high social and religious importance of marital fidelity , especially female fidelity , has as result the criminalization of adultery , often with harsh penalties such as stoning or flogging ; as well as leniency towards punishment of violence related to infidelity -LRB- such as honor killings -RRB- .
In the 21st century , criminal laws against adultery have become controversial with international organizations calling for their abolition .
Opponents of adultery laws argue that these laws are a major contributor to discrimination and violence against women , as they are enforced selectively mostly against women ; that they prevent women from reporting sexual violence ; and that they maintain social norms which justify violent crimes committed against women by husbands , families and communities .
A Joint Statement by the United Nations Working Group on discrimination against women in law and in practice states that `` Adultery as a criminal offence violates women 's human rights '' .
Some human rights organizations argue that the criminalization of adultery also violates internationally recognized protections for private life , as it represents an arbitrary interference with an individual 's privacy , which is not permitted under international law .
Economic anthropologist Duran Bell has criticized the legitimacy-based definition on the basis that some societies do not require marriage for legitimacy .
Historically , and still in many countries , children born outside marriage suffered severe social stigma and discrimination .
In England and Wales , such children were known as bastards and whoresons .
Therefore what God has joined together , let man not separate .
Catholics , Eastern Orthodox , and many Anglicans consider marriage termed holy matrimony to be an expression of divine grace , termed a sacrament or mystery .
In Western ritual , the ministers of the sacrament are the husband and wife themselves , with a bishop , priest , or deacon merely witnessing the union on behalf of the Church and blessing it .
In Eastern ritual churches , the bishop or priest functions as the actual minister of the Sacred Mystery ; Eastern Orthodox deacons may not perform marriages .
Western Christians commonly refer to marriage as a vocation , while Eastern Christians consider it an ordination and a martyrdom , though the theological emphases indicated by the various names are not excluded by the teachings of either tradition .
Marriage is commonly celebrated in the context of a Eucharistic service -LRB- a nuptial Mass or Divine Liturgy -RRB- .
For a Muslim wedding to take place , the bridegroom and the guardian of the bride -LRB- wali -RRB- must both agree on the marriage .
Should the guardian disagree on the marriage , it may not legally take place .
A guardian who is allowed to force the bride into marriage is called wali mujbir .
The mythological origin of Chinese marriage is a story about Nüwa and Fu Xi who invented proper marriage procedures after becoming married .
In ancient Chinese society , people of the same surname are supposed to consult with their family trees prior to marriage to reduce the potential risk of unintentional incest .
Marrying one 's maternal relatives was generally not thought of as incest .
Families sometimes intermarried from one generation to another .
Over time , Chinese people became more geographically mobile .
Individuals remained members of their biological families .
When a couple died , the husband and the wife were buried separately in the respective clan 's graveyard .
In a maternal marriage a male would become a son-in-law who lived in the wife 's home .
Zeitzen also notes that Western perceptions of African society and marriage patterns are biased by `` contradictory concerns of nostalgia for traditional African culture versus critique of polygamy as oppressive to women or detrimental to development . ''
Polygamy has been condemned as being a form of human rights abuse , with concerns arising over domestic abuse , forced marriage , and neglect .
The vast majority of the world 's countries , including virtually all of the world 's developed nations , do not permit polygamy .
Nonetheless , polygyny is a gender issue which offers men asymmetrical benefits .
Tensions not only exist between genders , but also within genders ; senior and junior men compete for wives , and senior and junior wives in the same household may experience radically different life conditions , and internal hierarchy .
Several studies have suggested that the wive 's relationship with other women , including co-wives and husband 's female kin , are more critical relationships than that with her husband for her productive , reproductive and personal achievement .
In some societies , the co-wives are relatives , usually sisters , a practice called sororal polygyny ; the pre-existing relationship between the co-wives is thought to decrease potential tensions within the marriage .
The explanation for polyandry in the Himalayan Mountains is related to the scarcity of land ; the marriage of all brothers in a family to the same wife -LRB- fraternal polyandry -RRB- allows family land to remain intact and undivided .
If every brother married separately and had children , family land would be split into unsustainable small plots .
In Europe , this was prevented through the social practice of impartible inheritance -LRB- the dis-inheriting of most siblings , some of whom went on to become celibate monks and priests -RRB- .
As noted above , several kinds of same-gendered , non-sexual marriages exist in some lineage-based societies ; this section relates to same-gendered sexual unions .
Some cultures include third-gender -LRB- two-spirit or transgender -RRB- individuals , such as the berdache of the Zuni in New Mexico .
We ` wha , one of the most revered Zuni elders -LRB- an Ihamana , spiritual leader -RRB- served as an emissary of the Zuni to Washington , where he met President Grover Cleveland .
We ` wha had a husband who was generally recognized as such .
The United Nations World Fertility Report of 2003 reports that 89 % of all people get married before age forty-nine .
The percent of women and men who marry before age forty-nine drops to nearly 50 % in some nations and reaches near 100 % in other nations .
Traditional marriage imposed an obligation of the wife to be sexually available for her husband and an obligation of the husband to provide material/financial support for the wife .
Numerous philosophers , feminists and other academic figures have commented on this throughout history , condemning the hypocrisy of legal and religious authorities in regard to sexual issues ; pointing to the lack of choice of a woman in regard to controlling her own sexuality ; and drawing parallels between marriage , an institution promoted as sacred , and prostitution , widely condemned and vilified -LRB- though often tolerated as a `` necessary evil '' -RRB- .
Mary Wollstonecraft , in the 18th century , described marriage as `` legal prostitution '' .
Emma Goldman wrote in 1910 : `` To the moralist prostitution does not consist so much in the fact that the woman sells her body , but rather that she sells it out of wedlock '' .
Bertrand Russell in his book Marriage and Morals wrote that : `` Marriage is for woman the commonest mode of livelihood , and the total amount of undesired sex endured by women is probably greater in marriage than in prostitution . ''
Volborthella , some fossils of which predate 530 million years ago , was long thought to be a cephalopod , but discoveries of more detailed fossils showed its shell was not secreted , but built from grains of the mineral silicon dioxide -LRB- silica -RRB- , and it was not divided into a series of compartments by septa as those of fossil shelled cephalopods and the living Nautilus are .
The Late Cambrian fossil Plectronoceras is now thought to be the earliest clearly cephalopod fossil , as its shell had septa and a siphuncle , a strand of tissue that Nautilus uses to remove water from compartments it has vacated as it grows , and which is also visible in fossil ammonite shells .
However , Plectronoceras and other early cephalopods crept along the seafloor instead of swimming , as their shells contained a `` ballast '' of stony deposits on what is thought to be the underside , and had stripes and blotches on what is thought to be the upper surface .
All cephalopods with external shells except the nautiloids became extinct by the end of the Cretaceous period 65 million years ago .
Mollusc shells , including those of cowries , were used as a kind of money -LRB- shell money -RRB- in several preindustrial societies .
However , these `` currencies '' generally differed in important ways from the standardized government-backed and - controlled money familiar to industrial societies .
Some shell `` currencies '' were not used for commercial transactions , but mainly as social status displays at important occasions , such as weddings .
When used for commercial transactions , they functioned as commodity money , as a tradable commodity whose value differed from place to place , often as a result of difficulties in transport , and which was vulnerable to incurable inflation if more efficient transport or `` goldrush '' behavior appeared .
At first , it seemed as though the new radiation was similar to the then recently discovered X-rays .
Further research by Becquerel , Ernest Rutherford , Paul Villard , Pierre Curie , Marie Curie , and others showed that this form of radioactivity was significantly more complicated .
Rutherford was the first to realize that all such elements decay in accordance with the same mathematical exponential formula .
Rutherford and his student Frederick Soddy were the first to realize that many decay processes resulted in the transmutation of one element to another .
Subsequently , the radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy was formulated to describe the products of alpha and beta decay .
The International System of Units -LRB- SI -RRB- unit of radioactive activity is the becquerel -LRB- Bq -RRB- , named in honour of the scientist Henri Becquerel .
One Bq is defined as one transformation -LRB- or decay or disintegration -RRB- per second .
Decay energy therefore remains associated with a certain measure of mass of the decay system , called invariant mass , which does not change during the decay , even though the energy of decay is distributed among decay particles .
The energy of photons , the kinetic energy of emitted particles , and , later , the thermal energy of the surrounding matter , all contribute to the invariant mass of the system .
Thus , while the sum of the rest masses of the particles is not conserved in radioactive decay , the system mass and system invariant mass -LRB- and also the system total energy -RRB- is conserved throughout any decay process .
Recent results suggest the possibility that decay rates might have a weak dependence on environmental factors .
It has been suggested that measurements of decay rates of silicon-32 , manganese-54 , and radium-226 exhibit small seasonal variations -LRB- of the order of 0.1 % -RRB- , while the decay of radon-222 is reported to exhibit large 4 % peak-to-peak seasonal variations , proposed to be related to either solar flare activity or the distance from the Sun .
However , such measurements are highly susceptible to systematic errors , and a subsequent paper has found no evidence for such correlations in seven other isotopes -LRB- 22Na , 44Ti , 108Ag , 121Sn , 133Ba , 241Am , 238Pu -RRB- , and sets upper limits on the size of any such effects .
An unexpected series of experimental results for the rate of decay of heavy highly charged radioactive ions circulating in a storage ring has provoked theoretical activity in an effort to find a convincing explanation .
The observed phenomenon is known as the GSI anomaly , as the storage ring is a facility at the GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt Germany .
As the decay process produces an electron neutrino , some of the proposed explanations for the observed rate oscillation invoke neutrino properties .
Initial ideas related to flavour oscillation met with skepticism .
A more recent proposal involves mass differences between neutrino mass eigenstates .
At the anterior end of the animal , the nerves branch from a dense , circular nerve -LRB- nerve ring -RRB- round surrounding the pharynx , and serving as the brain .
Smaller nerves run forward from the ring to supply the sensory organs of the head .
They prey upon the wasps , riding them from the ripe fig of the wasp 's birth to the fig flower of its death , where they kill the wasp , and their offspring await the birth of the next generation of wasps as the fig ripens .
From agricultural and horticulture perspectives , the two categories of nematodes are the predatory ones , which will kill garden pests like cutworms and corn earworm moths , and the pest nematodes , like the root-knot nematode , which attack plants , and those that act as vectors spreading plant viruses between crop plants .
Predatory nematodes can be bred by soaking a specific recipe of leaves and other detritus in water , in a dark , cool place , and can even be purchased as an organic form of pest control .
The other group within the Viridiplantae are the mainly freshwater or terrestrial Streptophyta , which consists of the land plants together with the Charophyta , itself consisting of several groups of green algae such as the desmids and stoneworts .
The freshwater stoneworts strongly resemble land plants and are believed to be their closest relatives .
Bryophytes first appeared during the early Paleozoic .
Most species of bryophytes remain small throughout their life-cycle .
This involves an alternation between two generations : a haploid stage , called the gametophyte , and a diploid stage , called the sporophyte .
The bryophytes have the ability to secrete a cuticle on their outer surface , a waxy layer that confers resistant to desiccation .
In the mosses and hornworts a cuticle is usually only produced on the sporophyte .
Stomata are absent from liverworts , but occur on the sporangia of mosses and hornworts , allowing gas exchange while controlling water loss .
In the Fossil Grove at Victoria Park in Glasgow , Scotland , the stumps of Lepidodendron trees are found in their original growth positions .
By means of cells that behave like nerves , plants receive and distribute within their systems information about incident light intensity and quality .
Incident light that stimulates a chemical reaction in one leaf , will cause a chain reaction of signals to the entire plant via a type of cell termed a bundle sheath cell .
Researchers , from the Warsaw University of Life Sciences in Poland , found that plants have a specific memory for varying light conditions , which prepares their immune systems against seasonal pathogens .
Plants use pattern-recognition receptors to recognize conserved microbial signatures .
This recognition triggers an immune response .
The first plant receptors of conserved microbial signatures were identified in rice -LRB- XA21 , 1995 -RRB- and in Arabidopsis thaliana -LRB- FLS2 , 2000 -RRB- .
Plants also carry immune receptors that recognize highly variable pathogen effectors .
These include the NBS-LRR class of proteins .
When the name Plantae or plant is applied to a specific group of organisms or taxon , it usually refers to one of four concepts .
Much of human nutrition depends on plants , either directly through foods and beverages consumed by people , or indirectly as feed for animals or the flavoring of foods .
The science of agriculture deals with the planting , raising , nutrition , and harvest of food crops , and has played a key role in the history of world civilizations .
Many plants are used to flavor foods .
Such plants include herbs -LRB- e.g. rosemary and mint -RRB- , which come from the green leafy parts of plants , and spices -LRB- e.g. cumin and cinnamon -RRB- , which come from other plant parts .
Some plants produce edible flowers , which may be added to salads or used to decorate foods .
Sweeteners such as sugar and stevia are derived from plants .
Sugar is obtained mainly from sugar cane and sugar beet , and honey is created when bees regurgitate the nectar from flowers .
Cooking oils and margarine come from maize , soybean , rapeseed , safflower , sunflower , olive and others .
Food additives include gum arabic , guar gum , locust bean gum , starch and pectin .
Algae comprise several different groups of organisms which produce energy through photosynthesis and for that reason have been included in the plant kingdom in the past .
Most conspicuous among the algae are the seaweeds , multicellular algae that may roughly resemble land plants , but are classified among the brown , red and green algae .
Each of these algal groups also includes various microscopic and single-celled organisms .
There is good evidence that some of these algal groups arose independently from separate non-photosynthetic ancestors , with the result that the brown algae , for example , are no longer classified within the plant kingdom as it is defined here .
In 1889 he was named the successor to Kirchhoff 's position at the Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität in Berlin -- presumably thanks to Helmholtz 's intercession -- and by 1892 became a full professor .
In 1907 Planck was offered Boltzmann 's position in Vienna , but turned it down to stay in Berlin .
During 1909 , as a University of Berlin professor , he was invited to become the Ernest Kempton Adams Lecturer in Theoretical Physics at Columbia University in New York City .
A series of his lectures were translated and co-published by Columbia University professor A. P. Wills .
Nonetheless , Planck refrained from the extremes of nationalism .
In 1915 , at a time when Italy was about to join the Allied Powers , he voted successfully for a scientific paper from Italy , which received a prize from the Prussian Academy of Sciences , where Planck was one of four permanent presidents .
One year later , Planck , having been the president of the KWG since 1930 , organized in a somewhat provocative style an official commemorative meeting for Haber .
He also succeeded in secretly enabling a number of Jewish scientists to continue working in institutes of the KWG for several years .
In 1936 , his term as president of the KWG ended , and the Nazi government pressured him to refrain from seeking another term .
In a lecture in 1937 entitled `` Religion und Naturwissenschaft '' he suggested the importance of these symbols and rituals related directly with a believer 's ability to worship God , but that one must be mindful that the symbols provide an imperfect illustration of divinity .
He criticized atheism for being focused on the derision of such symbols , while at the same time warned of the over-estimation of the importance of such symbols by believers .
Hitler 's Gift : The True Story of the Scientists Expelled by the Nazi Regime -LRB- Paperback -RRB- .
can be added to the complex plane as a topological space giving the one-point compactification of the complex plane .
When this is done , the resulting space is a one-dimensional complex manifold , or Riemann surface , called the extended complex plane or the Riemann sphere .
Arithmetic operations similar to those given above for the extended real numbers can also be defined , though there is no distinction in the signs -LRB- therefore one exception is that infinity can not be added to itself -RRB- .
On the other hand , this kind of infinity enables division by zero , namely
The original formulation of infinitesimal calculus by Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz used infinitesimal quantities .
In the twentieth century , it was shown that this treatment could be put on a rigorous footing through various logical systems , including smooth infinitesimal analysis and nonstandard analysis .
Cantor defined two kinds of infinite numbers : ordinal numbers and cardinal numbers .
Ordinal numbers may be identified with well-ordered sets , or counting carried on to any stopping point , including points after an infinite number have already been counted .
Generalizing finite and the ordinary infinite sequences which are maps from the positive integers leads to mappings from ordinal numbers , and transfinite sequences .
Cardinal numbers define the size of sets , meaning how many members they contain , and can be standardized by choosing the first ordinal number of a certain size to represent the cardinal number of that size .
If a set is too large to be put in one to one correspondence with the positive integers , it is called uncountable .
Cantor 's views prevailed and modern mathematics accepts actual infinity .
Certain extended number systems , such as the hyperreal numbers , incorporate the ordinary -LRB- finite -RRB- numbers and infinite numbers of different sizes .
Some programming languages , such as Java and J , allow the programmer an explicit access to the positive and negative infinity values as language constants .
These can be used as greatest and least elements , as they compare -LRB- respectively -RRB- greater than or less than all other values .
They have uses as sentinel values in algorithms involving sorting , searching , or windowing .
The pre-history of the Ancient Near East begins in the Lower Paleolithic period , but writing began with a pictographic script in the Uruk IV period -LRB- ca. 4th millennium BC -RRB- , and the documented record of actual historical events -- and the ancient history of lower Mesopotamia -- commence in the mid-third millennium BC with cuneiform records of early dynastic kings , and ends with either the arrival of the Achaemenid Empire in the late 6th century BC , or with the Muslim conquest and the establishment of the Caliphate in the late 7th century AD , from which point the region came to be known as Iraq .
During this period Mesopotamia housed some of the world 's most ancient highly developed and socially complex states .
Mesopotamian people invented many technologies including metal and copper-working , glass and lamp making , textile weaving , flood control , water storage , and irrigation .
Palaces were decorated with hundreds of kilograms of these very expensive metals .
Also , copper , bronze , and iron were used for armor as well as for different weapons such as swords , daggers , spears , and maces .
Giorgio Buccellati believes that the origins of philosophy can be traced back to early Mesopotamian wisdom , which embodied certain philosophies of life , particularly ethics , in the forms of dialectic , dialogues , epic poetry , folklore , hymns , lyrics , prose works , and proverbs .
Babylonian reason and rationality developed beyond empirical observation .
The need for irrigation led the Sumerians , and later the Akkadians , to build their cities along the Tigris and Euphrates and the branches of these rivers .
Mesopotamian settlers were some of the first people to make beer and wine .
As a result of the skill involved in farming in the Mesopotamian , farmers did not depend on slaves to complete farm work for them , but there were some exceptions .
Although the rivers sustained life , they also destroyed it by frequent floods that ravaged entire cities .
The unpredictable Mesopotamian weather was often hard on farmers ; crops were often ruined so backup sources of food such as cows and lambs were also kept .
Over time the southernmost parts of Sumerian Mesopotamia suffered from increased salinity of the soils , leading to a slow urban decline and a centring of power in Akkad , further north .
Major cities , such as Ur and Uruk , took root on tributaries of the Euphrates , while others , notably Lagash , were built on branches of the Tigris .
The rivers provided the further benefits of fish -LRB- used both for food and fertilizer -RRB- , reeds , and clay -LRB- for building materials -RRB- .
The Tigris and Euphrates River valleys form the northeastern portion of the Fertile Crescent , which also included the Jordan River valley and that of the Nile .
Other Mesopotamian innovations include the control of water by dams and the use of aqueducts .
Early settlers of fertile land in Mesopotamia used wooden plows to soften the soil before planting crops such as barley , onions , grapes , turnips , and apples .
The regional toponym Mesopotamia comes from the ancient Greek root words μέσος -LRB- meso -RRB- `` middle '' and ποταμός -LRB- potamos -RRB- `` river '' and literally means '' -LRB- Land -RRB- between two/the rivers '' .
It is used throughout the Greek Septuagint -LRB- ca. 250 BC -RRB- to translate the Hebrew equivalent Naharaim .
An even earlier Greek usage of the name Mesopotamia is evident from The Anabasis of Alexander , which was written in the late 2nd century AD , but specifically refers to sources from the time of Alexander the Great .
In the Anabasis , Mesopotamia was used to designate the land east of the Euphrates in north Syria .
It is usually used to designate the area until the Muslim conquests , with names like Syria , Jazirah , and Iraq being used to describe the region after that date .
It has been argued that these later euphemisms are Eurocentric terms attributed to the region in the midst of various 19th-century Western encroachments .
Some P. vivax sporozoites do not immediately develop into exoerythrocytic-phase merozoites , but instead , produce hypnozoites that remain dormant for periods ranging from several months -LRB- 7 -- 10 months is typical -RRB- to several years .
During childhood , malaria causes anemia during a period of rapid brain development , and also direct brain damage resulting from cerebral malaria .
Some survivors of cerebral malaria have an increased risk of neurological and cognitive deficits , behavioural disorders , and epilepsy .
Malaria prophylaxis was shown to improve cognitive function and school performance in clinical trials when compared to placebo groups .
The first pesticide used for indoor residual spraying was DDT .
Although it was initially used exclusively to combat malaria , its use quickly spread to agriculture .
In time , pest control , rather than disease control , came to dominate DDT use , and this large-scale agricultural use led to the evolution of resistant mosquitoes in many regions .
The DDT resistance shown by Anopheles mosquitoes can be compared to antibiotic resistance shown by bacteria .
During the 1960s , awareness of the negative consequences of its indiscriminate use increased , ultimately leading to bans on agricultural applications of DDT in many countries in the 1970s .
Before DDT , malaria was successfully eliminated or controlled in tropical areas like Brazil and Egypt by removing or poisoning the breeding grounds of the mosquitoes or the aquatic habitats of the larva stages , for example by applying the highly toxic arsenic compound Paris Green to places with standing water .
Nearly 200 parasitic Plasmodium species have been identified that infect birds , reptiles , and other mammals , and about 30 species naturally infect non-human primates .
Some malaria parasites that affect non-human primates -LRB- NHP -RRB- serve as model organisms for human malarial parasites , such as P. coatneyi -LRB- a model for P. falciparum -RRB- and P. cynomolgi -LRB- P. vivax -RRB- .
Diagnostic techniques used to detect parasites in NHP are similar to those employed for humans .
Malaria parasites that infect rodents are widely used as models in research , such as P. berghei .
Avian malaria primarily affects species of the order Passeriformes , and poses a substantial threat to birds of Hawaii , the Galapagos , and other archipelagoes .
The parasite P. relictum is known to play a role in limiting the distribution and abundance of endemic Hawaiian birds .
Global warming is expected to increase the prevalence and global distribution of avian malaria , as elevated temperatures provide optimal conditions for parasite reproduction .
During the southern winter -LRB- March -- September -RRB- , the South Pole receives no sunlight at all , and from May to July , between extended periods of twilight , it is completely dark -LRB- apart from moonlight -RRB- .
In the summer -LRB- September -- March -RRB- , the sun is continuously above the horizon and appears to move in a counter-clockwise circle .
Much of the sunlight that does reach the surface is reflected by the white snow .
This lack of warmth from the sun , combined with the high altitude -LRB- about 2,800 metres -LRB- 9,200 ft -RRB- -RRB- , means that the South Pole has one of the coldest climates on Earth -LRB- though it is not quite the coldest ; that record goes to the region in the vicinity of the Vostok Station , also in Antarctica , which lies at a higher elevation -RRB- .
Temperatures at the South Pole are much lower than at the North Pole , primarily because the South Pole is located at altitude in the middle of a continental land mass , while the North Pole is at sea level in the middle of an ocean , which acts as a reservoir of heat .
If molecules , or atoms , or electrons , are emitted from a material and their velocities are measured , the spectrum of their velocities often nearly obeys a theoretical law called the Maxwell -- Boltzmann distribution , which gives a well-founded measurement of temperatures for which the law holds .
The coldest theoretical temperature is absolute zero , at which the thermal motion of atoms and molecules reaches its minimum -- classically , this would be a state of motionlessness , but quantum uncertainty dictates that the particles still possess a finite zero-point energy .
Absolute zero is denoted as 0 K on the Kelvin scale , − 273.15 ° C on the Celsius scale , and − 459.67 ° F on the Fahrenheit scale .
For study by methods of classical irreversible thermodynamics , a body is usually spatially and temporally divided conceptually into ` cells ' of small size .
If classical thermodynamic equilibrium conditions for matter are fulfilled to good approximation in such a ` cell ' , then it is homogeneous and a temperature exists for it .
If this is so for every ` cell ' of the body , then local thermodynamic equilibrium is said to prevail throughout the body .
For axiomatic treatment of thermodynamic equilibrium , since the 1930s , it has become customary to refer to a zeroth law of thermodynamics .
The customarily stated minimalist version of such a law postulates only that all bodies , which when thermally connected would be in thermal equilibrium , should be said to have the same temperature by definition , but by itself does not establish temperature as a quantity expressed as a real number on a scale .
If internal energy is considered as a function of the volume and entropy of a homogeneous system in thermodynamic equilibrium , thermodynamic absolute temperature appears as the partial derivative of internal energy with respect the entropy at constant volume .
Although this is the lowest absolute temperature described by the model , the third law of thermodynamics postulates that absolute zero can not be attained by any physical system .
The kinetic theory assumes that pressure is caused by the force associated with individual atoms striking the walls , and that all energy is translational kinetic energy .
Using a sophisticated symmetry argument , Boltzmann deduced what is now called the Maxwell -- Boltzmann probability distribution function for the velocity of particles in an ideal gas .
In the previous section certain properties of temperature were expressed by the zeroth law of thermodynamics .
It is also possible to define temperature in terms of the second law of thermodynamics which deals with entropy .
The second law states that any process will result in either no change or a net increase in the entropy of the universe .
This can be understood in terms of probability .
The generalized temperature is obtained by considering time ensembles instead of configuration-space ensembles given in statistical mechanics in the case of thermal and particle exchange between a small system of fermions -LRB- N even less than 10 -RRB- with a single/double-occupancy system .
The finite quantum grand canonical ensemble , obtained under the hypothesis of ergodicity and orthodicity , allows to express the generalized temperature from the ratio of the average time of occupation
Maize is a facultative short-day plant and flowers in a certain number of growing degree days > 10 ° C -LRB- 50 ° F -RRB- in the environment to which it is adapted .
The magnitude of the influence that long nights have on the number of days that must pass before maize flowers is genetically prescribed and regulated by the phytochrome system .
Photoperiodicity can be eccentric in tropical cultivars such that the long days characteristic of higher latitudes allow the plants to grow so tall that they do not have enough time to produce seed before being killed by frost .
These attributes , however , may prove useful in using tropical maize for biofuels .
The leafy stalk of the plant produces separate pollen and ovuliferous inflorescences or ears , which are fruits , yielding kernels or seeds .
Maize kernels are often used in cooking as a starch .
Since the 1940s the best strains of maize have been first-generation hybrids made from inbred strains that have been optimized for specific traits , such as yield , nutrition , drought , pest and disease tolerance .
Both conventional cross-breeding and genetic modification have succeeded in increasing output and reducing the need for cropland , pesticides , water and fertilizer .
The teosinte origin theory was proposed by the Russian botanist Nikolai Ivanovich Vavilov in 1931 and the later American Nobel Prize-winner George Beadle in 1932 .
Teosinte and maize are able to cross-breed and produce fertile offspring .
Introduced into Africa by the Portuguese in the 16th century , maize has become Africa 's most important staple food crop .
Maize meal is made into a thick porridge in many cultures : from the polenta of Italy , the angu of Brazil , the mămăligă of Romania , to cornmeal mush in the US -LRB- and hominy grits in the South -RRB- or the food called mealie pap in South Africa and sadza , nshima and ugali in other parts of Africa .
Maize meal is also used as a replacement for wheat flour , to make cornbread and other baked products .
Masa -LRB- cornmeal treated with limewater -RRB- is the main ingredient for tortillas , atole and many other dishes of Central American food .
Maize is used as a fish bait , called `` dough balls '' .
The Moche culture from Northern Peru made ceramics from earth , water , and fire .
This pottery was a sacred substance , formed in significant shapes and used to represent important themes .
Maize represented anthropomorphically as well as naturally .
The word bolt is also a very old word , and it was used for centuries to refer to metal rods that passed through the substrate to be fastened on the other side , often via nonthreaded means -LRB- clinching , forge welding , pinning , wedging , etc. -RRB- .
In the 19th century , bolts fastened via screw threads were often called screw bolts in contradistinction to clench bolts .
The American Institute of Steel Construction -LRB- AISC -RRB- 13th Edition Steel Design Manual section 16.1 chapter J-3 specifies the requirements for bolted structural connections .
Structural bolts replaced rivets due to decreasing cost and increasing strength of structural bolts in the 20th century .
Common bearing type connections include : shear tabs , beam supports , gusset plates in trusses .
Connections are formed with two types of joints : slip-critical connections and bearing connections .
In slip-critical connections , movement of the connected parts is a serviceability condition and bolts are tightened to a minimum required pretension .
Slip is prevented through friction of the `` faying '' surface , that is the plane of shear for the bolt and where two members make contact .
Because friction is proportional to the normal force , connections must be sized with bolts numerous and large enough to provide the required load capacity .
In this type of connection the bolts carry the load through shear and are only tightened to a `` snug-fit '' .
These connections require fewer bolts than slip-critical connections and therefore are a less expensive alternative .
Tensile yield strength is the stress at which the bolt will yield in tension across the entire section of the bolt and receive a permanent set -LRB- an elongation from which it will not recover when the force is removed -RRB- of 0.2 % offset strain .
Tension testing of a bolt up to the proof load should not cause permanent set of the bolt and should be conducted on actual fasteners rather than calculated .
If a bolt is tensioned beyond the proof load , it may behave in plastic manner due to yielding in the threads and the tension preload may be lost due to the permanent plastic deformations .
When elongating a fastener prior to reaching the yield point , the fastener is said to be operating in the elastic region ; whereas elongation beyond the yield point is referred to as operating in the plastic region of the bolt material .
If a bolt is loaded in tension beyond its proof strength , the yielding at the net root section of the bolt will continue until the entire section is begins to yield and it has exceeded its yield strength .
ASME standard B18.2.1-1996 specifies Hex Cap Screws that range in size from 0.25 -- 3 in -LRB- 6.35 -- 76.20 mm -RRB- in diameter .
In 1991 responding to an influx of counterfeit fasteners Congress passed PL 101-592 `` Fastener Quality Act '' This resulted in the rewriting of specifications by the ASME B18 committee .
B18 .2.1 was re-written and as a result they eliminated the `` Finished Hex Bolts '' and renamed them the `` Hex Cap Screw '' -- a term that had existed in common usage long before , but was now also being codified as an official name for the ASME B18 standard . .
Western theatre developed and expanded considerably under the Romans .
The Roman historian Livy wrote that the Romans first experienced theatre in the 4th century BCE , with a performance by Etruscan actors .
Beacham argues that they had been familiar with `` pre-theatrical practices '' for some time before that recorded contact .
The theatre of ancient Rome was a thriving and diverse art form , ranging from festival performances of street theatre , nude dancing , and acrobatics , to the staging of Plautus 's broadly appealing situation comedies , to the high-style , verbally elaborate tragedies of Seneca .
Although Rome had a native tradition of performance , the Hellenization of Roman culture in the 3rd century BCE had a profound and energizing effect on Roman theatre and encouraged the development of Latin literature of the highest quality for the stage .
The only surviving Roman tragedies , indeed the only plays of any kind from the Roman Empire , are ten dramas - nine of them pallilara - attributed to Lucuis Annaeus Seneca -LRB- 4 b.c.-65 a.d. -RRB- , the Corduba-born Stoic philosopher and tutor of Nero .
Improvisation has been a consistent feature of theatre , with the Commedia dell ` arte in the sixteenth century being recognised as the first improvisation form .
Popularized by Nobel Prize Winner Dario Fo and troupes such as the Upright Citizens Brigade improvisational theatre continues to evolve with many different streams and philosophies .
Keith Johnstone and Viola Spolin are recognized as the first teachers of improvisation in modern times , with Johnstone exploring improvisation as an alternative to scripted theatre and Spolin and her successors exploring improvisation principally as a tool for developing dramatic work or skills or as a form for situational comedy .
Spolin also became interested in how the process of learning improvisation was applicable to the development of human potential .
Spolin 's son , Paul Sills popularized improvisational theater as a theatrical art form when he founded .
Theatre presupposes collaborative modes of production and a collective form of reception .
The structure of dramatic texts , unlike other forms of literature , is directly influenced by this collaborative production and collective reception .
The production of plays usually involves contributions from a playwright , director , a cast of actors , and a technical production team that includes a scenic or set designer , lighting designer , costume designer , sound designer , stage manager , production manager and technical director .
Depending on the production , this team may also include a composer , dramaturg , video designer or fight director .
In its most basic form , stagecraft is managed by a single person -LRB- often the stage manager of a smaller production -RRB- who arranges all scenery , costumes , lighting , and sound , and organizes the cast .
At a more professional level , for example in modern Broadway houses , stagecraft is managed by hundreds of skilled carpenters , painters , electricians , stagehands , stitchers , wigmakers , and the like .
This modern form of stagecraft is highly technical and specialized : it comprises many sub-disciplines and a vast trove of history and tradition .
The majority of stagecraft lies between these two extremes .
As construction was progressing on St Peter 's , there was concern that Michelangelo would pass away before the dome was finished .
However , once building commenced on the lower part of the dome , the supporting ring , the completion of the design was inevitable .
It is impossible to know for certain whether Michelangelo had physical relationships -LRB- Condivi ascribed to him a `` monk-like chastity '' -RRB- , but the nature of his sexuality is made apparent in his poetry .
The longest sequence displaying a great romantic friendship , was written to Tommaso dei Cavalieri -LRB- c. 1509 -- 1587 -RRB- , who was 23 years old when Michelangelo met him in 1532 , at the age of 57 .
These make up the first large sequence of poems in any modern tongue addressed by one man to another , predating Shakespeare 's sonnets to the fair youth by fifty years :
The Sistine Chapel ceiling was painted between 1508 and 1512 .
The ceiling is a flattened barrel vault supported on twelve triangular pendentives that rise from between the windows of the chapel .
The commission , as envisaged by Pope Julius II , was to adorn the pendentives with figures of the twelve apostles .
Michelangelo , who was reluctant to take the job , persuaded the Pope to give him a free hand in the composition .
The resultant scheme of decoration awed his contemporaries and has inspired other artists ever since .
The scheme is of nine panels illustrating episodes from the Book of Genesis , set in an architectonic frame .
On the pendentives , Michelangelo replaced the proposed Apostles with Prophets and Sibyls who heralded the coming of the Messiah .
In 1546 Michelangelo produced the highly complex ovoid design for the pavement of the Campidoglio and began designing an upper storey for the Farnese Palace .
In 1547 he took on the job of completing St Peter 's Basilica , begun to a design by Bramante , and with several intermediate designs by several architects .
Michelangelo returned to Bramante 's design , retaining the basic form and concepts by simplifying and strengthening the design to create a more dynamic and unified whole .
Although the late 16th-century engraving depicts the dome as having a hemispherical profile , the dome of Michelangelo 's model is somewhat ovoid and the final product , as completed by Giacomo della Porta is more so .
As a young boy , Michelangelo was sent to Florence to study grammar under the Humanist Francesco da Urbino .
The young artist , however , showed no interest in his schooling , preferring to copy paintings from churches and seek the company of painters .
In 1488 , at the age of 13 , Michelangelo was apprenticed to Ghirlandaio .
The next year , his father persuaded Ghirlandaio to pay Michelangelo as an artist , which was rare for someone of fourteen .
When in 1489 , Lorenzo de ' Medici , de facto ruler of Florence , asked Ghirlandaio for his two best pupils , Ghirlandaio sent Michelangelo and Francesco Granacci .
From 1490 to 1492 , Michelangelo attended the Humanist academy that the Medici had founded along Neo-Platonic lines .
At this time , Michelangelo sculpted the reliefs Madonna of the Steps -LRB- 1490 -- 1492 -RRB- and Battle of the Centaurs -LRB- 1491 -- 1492 -RRB- .
The latter was based on a theme suggested by Poliziano and was commissioned by Lorenzo de Medici .
Michelangelo worked for a time with the sculptor Bertoldo di Giovanni .
When he was seventeen , another pupil , Pietro Torrigiano , struck him on the nose , causing the disfigurement that is conspicuous in all the portraits of Michelangelo .
On 17 December 1954 , the North Atlantic Council approved MC 48 , a key document in the evolution of NATO nuclear thought .
MC 48 emphasized that NATO would have to use atomic weapons from the outset of a war with the Soviet Union whether or not the Soviets chose to use them first .
This gave SACEUR the same prerogatives for automatic use of nuclear weapons as existed for the commander-in-chief of the US Strategic Air Command .
NATO air strikes that year helped bring the Yugoslav wars to an end , resulting in the Dayton Agreement in November 1995 .
As part of this agreement , NATO deployed a UN-mandated peacekeeping force , under Operation Joint Endeavor , named IFOR .
This transitioned into the smaller SFOR , which started with 32,000 troops initially and ran from December 1996 until December 2004 , when operations were then passed onto European Union Force Althea .
Following the lead of its member nations , NATO began to award a service medal , the NATO Medal , for these operations .
The Treaty of Brussels , signed on 17 March 1948 by Belgium , the Netherlands , Luxembourg , France , and the United Kingdom , is considered the precursor to the NATO agreement .
The treaty and the Soviet Berlin Blockade led to the creation of the Western European Union 's Defence Organization in September 1948 .
The creation of NATO can be seen as the primary institutional consequence of a school of thought called Atlanticism which stressed the importance of trans-Atlantic cooperation .
However , participation of the United States was thought necessary both to counter the military power of the USSR and to prevent the revival of nationalist militarism .
In addition the 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état by the Communists had overthrown a democratic government and British Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin reiterated that the best way to prevent another Czechoslovakia was to evolve a joint Western military strategy .
In 1948 European leaders met with U.S. defense , military and diplomatic officials at the Pentagon , under U.S. Secretary of State George C. Marshall 's orders , exploring a framework for a new and unprecedented association .
Talks for a new military alliance resulted in the North Atlantic Treaty , which was signed in Washington , D.C. on 4 April 1949 .
The first NATO Secretary General , Lord Ismay , stated in 1949 that the organization 's goal was `` to keep the Russians out , the Americans in , and the Germans down . ''
Popular support for the Treaty was not unanimous , and some Icelanders participated in a pro-neutrality , anti-membership riot in March 1949 .
The main headquarters of NATO is located on Boulevard Léopold III/Leopold III-laan , B-1110 Brussels , which is in Haren , part of the City of Brussels municipality .
A new $ 750 million headquarters building begun in 2010 is , as of 2016 , under construction across from the current complex , and is due for completion by 2016 .
Problems in the current building stem from its hurried construction in 1967 , when NATO was forced to move its headquarters from Porte Dauphine in Paris , France following the French withdrawal .
During the Age of Discovery , Europeans explored and staked claims to various parts of North America .
Upon their arrival in the `` New World '' , the Native American population declined substantially , because of violent conflicts with the invaders and the introduction of European diseases to which the Native Americans lacked immunity .
Native culture changed drastically and their affiliation with political and cultural groups also changed .
Several linguistic groups died out , and others changed quite quickly .
The names and cultures that Europeans recorded were not necessarily the same as the names they had used a few generations before , or the ones in use today .
North America was reached by its first human populations during the last glacial period , via crossing the Bering land bridge .
The so-called Paleo-Indian period is taken to have lasted until about 10,000 years ago -LRB- the beginning of the Archaic or Meso-Indian period -RRB- .
The Classic stage spans roughly the 6th to 13th centuries .
The Pre-Columbian era ended with the transatlantic migrations and the arrival of European settlers during the Age of Discovery and the Early Modern period .
Present-day cultural and ethnic patterns reflect different kind of interactions between European colonists , indigenous peoples , African slaves and their descendants .
Because of the history of colonialism , most North Americans speak English , Spanish or French and societies and states commonly reflect Western traditions .
Today , dinitrogen complexes are known for almost all the transition metals , accounting for several hundred compounds .
3 are also known -LRB- the latter from reacting tetrafluorohydrazine with strong fluoride-acceptors such as arsenic pentafluoride -RRB- , as is ONF3 , which has aroused interest due to the short N -- O distance implying partial double bonding and the highly polar and long N -- F bond .
Tetrafluorohydrazine , unlike hydrazine itself , can dissociate at room temperature and above to give the radical NF2 • .
Dinitrogen difluoride -LRB- N2F2 -RRB- exists as thermally interconvertible cis and trans isomers , and was first found as a product of the thermal decomposition of FN3 .
Nitrogen compounds have a very long history , ammonium chloride having been known to Herodotus .
Alchemists knew nitric acid as aqua fortis -LRB- strong water -RRB- , as well as other nitrogen compounds such as ammonium salts and nitrate salts .
The mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids was known as aqua regia -LRB- royal water -RRB- , celebrated for its ability to dissolve gold , the king of metals .
Nitrogen is the most common pure element in the earth , making up 78.1 % of the entire volume of the atmosphere .
Despite this , it is not very abundant in Earth 's crust , making up only 19 parts per million of this , on par with niobium , gallium , and lithium .
However , these have not been an important source of nitrates since the 1920s , when the industrial synthesis of ammonia and nitric acid became common .
For a long time , sources of nitrogen compounds were limited .
Natural sources originated either from biology or deposits of nitrates produced by atmospheric reactions .
Nitrogen fixation by industrial processes like the Frank -- Caro process -LRB- 1895 -- 1899 -RRB- and Haber -- Bosch process -LRB- 1908 -- 1913 -RRB- eased this shortage of nitrogen compounds , to the extent that half of global food production -LRB- see Applications -RRB- now relies on synthetic nitrogen fertilisers .
At the same time , use of the Ostwald process -LRB- 1902 -RRB- to produce nitrates from industrial nitrogen fixation allowed the large-scale industrial production of nitrates as feedstock in the manufacture of explosives in the World Wars of the 20th century .
The prize is not awarded posthumously ; however , if a person is awarded a prize and dies before receiving it , the prize may still be presented .
Though the average number of laureates per prize increased substantially during the 20th century , a prize may not be shared among more than three people .
The award of the 2004 Literature Prize to Elfriede Jelinek drew a protest from a member of the Swedish Academy , Knut Ahnlund .
Ahnlund resigned , alleging that the selection of Jelinek had caused `` irreparable damage to all progressive forces , it has also confused the general view of literature as an art . ''
The 2009 Literature Prize to Herta Müller also generated criticism .
According to The Washington Post , many US literary critics and professors were ignorant of her work .
This made those critics feel the prizes were too Eurocentric .
In 1888 , Nobel was astonished to read his own obituary , titled The merchant of death is dead , in a French newspaper .
The article disconcerted Nobel and made him apprehensive about how he would be remembered .
On 10 December 1896 , Alfred Nobel died in his villa in San Remo , Italy , from a cerebral haemorrhage .
The Danubian Neolithic cultures include the Linear Pottery cultures of the mid-Danube basin .
Many sites of the sixth-to-third millennium BC Vinča culture , -LRB- Vinča , Serbia -RRB- are sited along the Danube .
In 2010 the Donausteig , a hiking trail from Passau to Grein , was opened .
Lemon juice and rind are used to make marmalade , lemon curd and lemon liqueur .
Lemon slices and lemon rind are used as a garnish for food and drinks .
Lemon zest , the grated outer rind of the fruit , is used to add flavor to baked goods , puddings , rice , and other dishes .
Nerves can be damaged by physical injury as well conditions like carpal tunnel syndrome and repetitive strain injury .
Autoimmune diseases such as Guillain -- Barré syndrome , neurodegenerative diseases , polyneuropathy , infection , neuritis , diabetes , or failure of the blood vessels surrounding the nerve all cause nerve damage , which can vary in severity .
In the central nervous system , the analogous structures are known as tracts .
Neurons are sometimes called nerve cells , though this term is potentially misleading since many neurons do not form nerves , and nerves also include non-neuronal Schwann cells that coat the axons in myelin .
Spinal nerves innervate -LRB- distribute to/stimulate -RRB- much of the body , and connect through the spinal column to the spinal cord and thus to the central nervous system .
They are given letter-number designations according to the vertebra through which they connect to the spinal column .
The Niger River is a relatively `` clear '' river , carrying only a tenth as much sediment as the Nile because the Niger 's headwaters lie in ancient rocks that provide little silt .
Like the Nile , the Niger floods yearly ; this begins in September , peaks in November , and finishes by May .
Strauss concludes his 1958 Thoughts on Machiavelli by proposing that this promotion of progress leads directly to the modern arms race .
Strauss argued that the unavoidable nature of such arms races , which have existed before modern times and led to the collapse of peaceful civilisations , provides us with both an explanation of what is most truly dangerous in Machiavelli 's innovations , but also the way in which the aims of his apparently immoral innovation can be understood .
After the Medici victory , the Florentine city-state and the republic were dissolved , and Machiavelli was deprived of office in 1512 .
In 1513 the Medici accused him of conspiracy against them and had him imprisoned .
Despite having been subjected to torture -LRB- `` with the rope '' in which the prisoner is hanged from his bound wrists , from the back , forcing the arms to bear the body 's weight and dislocating the shoulders -RRB- , he denied involvement and was released after three weeks .
By using gravity to move objects or substances downward , a tower can be used to store items or liquids like a storage silo or a water tower , or aim an object into the earth such as a drilling tower .
Ski-jump ramps use the same idea , and in the absence of a natural mountain slope or hill , can be human-made .
In 1610 Rubens moved into a new house and studio that he designed .
Now the Rubenshuis Museum , the Italian-influenced villa in the centre of Antwerp accommodated his workshop , where he and his apprentices made most of the paintings , and his personal art collection and library , both among the most extensive in Antwerp .
His most famous pupil was the young Anthony van Dyck , who soon became the leading Flemish portraitist and collaborated frequently with Rubens .
He also often collaborated with the many specialists active in the city , including the animal painter Frans Snyders , who contributed the eagle to Prometheus Bound , and his good friend the flower-painter Jan Brueghel the Elder .
In addition to running a large studio in Antwerp that produced paintings popular with nobility and art collectors throughout Europe , Rubens was a classically educated humanist scholar and diplomat who was knighted by both Philip IV of Spain and Charles I of England .
The catalogue of his works by Michael Jaffé lists 1,403 pieces , excluding numerous copies made in his workshop .
Maria Catharina Rubens -LRB- 1672-1710 -RRB- : married to Alexander IV Goubau , Lord of Mespelaere , -LRB- 1658-1712 -RRB- : Grand Aumonier of Antwerpen .
In 1600 Rubens travelled to Italy .
The colouring and compositions of Veronese and Tintoretto had an immediate effect on Rubens 's painting , and his later , mature style was profoundly influenced by Titian .
With financial support from the Duke , Rubens travelled to Rome by way of Florence in 1601 .
This monument portraying Tesla reading a set of notes was sculpted by Frano Kršinić .
Attempting to develop inventions he could patent and market , Tesla conducted a range of experiments with mechanical oscillators/generators , electrical discharge tubes , and early X-ray imaging .
Tesla became well known as an inventor and would demonstrate his achievements to celebrities and wealthy patrons at his lab , and was noted for his showmanship at public lectures .
The money Tesla made from licensing his AC patents made him independently wealthy and gave him the time and funds to pursue his own interests .
In 1889 Tesla moved out of the Liberty Street shop Peck and Brown had rented and for the next dozen years would work out of a series of workshop/laboratory spaces in Manhattan .
These included a lab at 175 Grand Street -LRB- 1889 -- 1892 -RRB- , the fourth floor of 33 -- 35 South Fifth Avenue -LRB- 1892 -- 1895 -RRB- , and sixth and seventh floors of 46 & 48 East Houston Street -LRB- 1895 -- 1902 -RRB- .
Tesla and his hired staff would conduct some of his most significant work in these workshops .
Trying to come up with a better way to generate alternating current , Tesla developed a steam powered reciprocating electricity generator .
Steam would be forced into the oscillator and rush out through a series of ports , pushing a piston up and down that was attached to an armature .
The magnetic armature vibrated up and down at high speed , producing an alternating magnetic field .
This induced alternating electric current in the wire coils located adjacent .
Tesla was born on 10 July -LSB- O.S. 28 June -RSB- 1856 into a Serb family in the village of Smiljan , Austrian Empire -LRB- modern-day Croatia -RRB- .
Tesla 's mother , Đuka Tesla -LRB- née Mandić ; 1822 -- 1892 -RRB- , whose father was also an Orthodox priest , had a talent for making home craft tools and mechanical appliances and the ability to memorize Serbian epic poems .
Đuka had never received a formal education .
Tesla credited his eidetic memory and creative abilities to his mother 's genetics and influence .
When World War One broke out the British cut the transatlantic telegraph cable linking the US to Germany in order to control the flow of information between the two countries .
They also tried to shut off German wireless communication to and from the US by having the US Marconi Company sue the German radio company Telefunken for patent infringement .
Telefunken brought in the physicist Jonathan Zenneck and Karl Ferdinand Braun for their defense and hired Tesla as a witness for two years for $ 1000 a month .
The case stalled and then went moot when the US entered the war against Germany in 1917 .
In 1952 , following pressure from Tesla 's nephew , Sava Kosanović , Tesla 's entire estate was shipped to Belgrade in 80 trunks marked N.T. .
In 1957 , Kosanović 's secretary Charlotte Muzar transported Tesla 's ashes from the United States to Belgrade .
The ashes are displayed in a gold-plated sphere on a marble pedestal in the Nikola Tesla Museum .
Tesla , like many of his era , became a proponent of an imposed selective breeding version of eugenics .
His opinion stemmed from the belief that humans ' `` pity '' had interfered with the natural `` ruthless workings of nature , '' rather than from conceptions of a `` master race '' or inherent superiority of one person over another .
... man 's new sense of pity began to interfere with the ruthless workings of nature .
Certainly no one who is not a desirable parent should be permitted to produce progeny .
A century from now it will no more occur to a normal person to mate with a person eugenically unfit than to marry a habitual criminal .
Tesla was raised an Orthodox Christian .
He also said `` To me , the universe is simply a great machine which never came into being and never will end '' and `` what we call ` soul ' or ` spirit , ' is nothing more than the sum of the functionings of the body .
Two main approaches are used in nanotechnology .
In the `` bottom-up '' approach , materials and devices are built from molecular components which assemble themselves chemically by principles of molecular recognition .
In the `` top-down '' approach , nano-objects are constructed from larger entities without atomic-level control .
It is hoped that developments in nanotechnology will make possible their construction by some other means , perhaps using biomimetic principles .
However , Drexler and other researchers have proposed that advanced nanotechnology , although perhaps initially implemented by biomimetic means , ultimately could be based on mechanical engineering principles , namely , a manufacturing technology based on the mechanical functionality of these components -LRB- such as gears , bearings , motors , and structural members -RRB- that would enable programmable , positional assembly to atomic specification .
The physics and engineering performance of exemplar designs were analyzed in Drexler 's book Nanosystems .
Bionics or biomimicry seeks to apply biological methods and systems found in nature , to the study and design of engineering systems and modern technology .
These subfields seek to anticipate what inventions nanotechnology might yield , or attempt to propose an agenda along which inquiry might progress .
These often take a big-picture view of nanotechnology , with more emphasis on its societal implications than the details of how such inventions could actually be created .
The atomic force microscope -LRB- AFM -RRB- and the Scanning Tunneling Microscope -LRB- STM -RRB- are two early versions of scanning probes that launched nanotechnology .
Although conceptually similar to the scanning confocal microscope developed by Marvin Minsky in 1961 and the scanning acoustic microscope -LRB- SAM -RRB- developed by Calvin Quate and coworkers in the 1970s , newer scanning probe microscopes have much higher resolution , since they are not limited by the wavelength of sound or light .
Second , Fullerenes were discovered in 1985 by Harry Kroto , Richard Smalley , and Robert Curl , who together won the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry .
C60 was not initially described as nanotechnology ; the term was used regarding subsequent work with related graphene tubes -LRB- called carbon nanotubes and sometimes called Bucky tubes -RRB- which suggested potential applications for nanoscale electronics and devices .
Mandela served 27 years in prison , initially on Robben Island , and later in Pollsmoor Prison and Victor Verster Prison .
Amid growing domestic and international pressure , and with fears of a racial civil war , President F. W. de Klerk released him in 1990 .
Mandela and de Klerk negotiated an end to apartheid and organised the 1994 multiracial general election in which Mandela led the ANC to victory and became President .
Leading a broad coalition government which promulgated a new constitution , Mandela emphasised reconciliation between the country 's racial groups and created the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate past human rights abuses .
Economically , Mandela 's administration retained its predecessor 's liberal framework despite his own socialist beliefs , also introducing measures to encourage land reform , combat poverty , and expand healthcare services .
Internationally , he acted as mediator in the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing trial and served as Secretary-General of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1998 to 1999 .
He declined a second presidential term and in 1999 was succeeded by his deputy , Thabo Mbeki .
Mandela became an elder statesman and focused on combating poverty and HIV/AIDS through the charitable Nelson Mandela Foundation .
The political prisoners took part in work and hunger strikes -- the latter considered largely ineffective by Mandela -- to improve prison conditions , viewing this as a microcosm of the anti-apartheid struggle .
ANC prisoners elected him to their four-man `` High Organ '' along with Sisulu , Govan Mbeki , and Raymond Mhlaba , and he involved himself in a group representing all political prisoners on the island , Ulundi , through which he forged links with PAC and Yu Chi Chan Club members .
Initiating the `` University of Robben Island '' , whereby prisoners lectured on their own areas of expertise , he debated socio-political topics with his comrades .
Critics like Edwin Cameron accused Mandela 's government of doing little to stem the HIV/AIDS pandemic in the country ; by 1999 , 10 % of South Africa 's population were HIV positive .
Mandela later admitted that he had personally neglected the issue , in part due to public reticence in discussing issues surrounding sex in South Africa , and that he had instead left the issue for Mbeki to deal with .
Mandela also received criticism for failing to sufficiently combat crime ; South Africa had one of the world 's highest crime rates , and the activities of international crime syndicates in the country grew significantly throughout the decade .
Mandela 's administration was also perceived as having failed to deal with the problem of corruption .
Further problems were caused by the exodus of thousands of skilled white South Africans from the country , who were escaping the increasing crime rates , higher taxes , and the impact of positive discrimination toward blacks in employment .
This exodus resulted in a brain drain , and Mandela criticised those who left .
At the same time , South Africa experienced an influx of millions of illegal migrants from poorer parts of Africa ; although public opinion toward these illegal immigrants was generally unfavourable , characterising them as disease-spreading criminals who were a drain on resources , Mandela called on South Africans to embrace them as `` brothers and sisters '' .
In June 2004 , aged 85 and amid failing health , Mandela announced that he was `` retiring from retirement '' and retreating from public life , remarking , `` Do n't call me , I will call you . ''
Although continuing to meet with close friends and family , the Foundation discouraged invitations for him to appear at public events and denied most interview requests .
Truncation errors are committed when an iterative method is terminated or a mathematical procedure is approximated , and the approximate solution differs from the exact solution .
Similarly , discretization induces a discretization error because the solution of the discrete problem does not coincide with the solution of the continuous problem .
Two cases are commonly distinguished , depending on whether the equation is linear or not .
Pierre de Fermat -LRB- 1601 -- 1665 -RRB- never published his writings ; in particular , his work on number theory is contained almost entirely in letters to mathematicians and in private marginal notes .
The theory of modular forms -LRB- and , more generally , automorphic forms -RRB- also occupies an increasingly central place in the toolbox of analytic number theory .
Fields of algebraic numbers are also called algebraic number fields , or shortly number fields .
Thus , analytic and algebraic number theory can and do overlap : the former is defined by its methods , the latter by its objects of study .
The initial impetus for the development of ideal numbers -LRB- by Kummer -RRB- seems to have come from the study of higher reciprocity laws , i.e. , generalisations of quadratic reciprocity .
Number fields are often studied as extensions of smaller number fields : a field L is said to be an extension of a field K if L contains K. -LRB- For example , the complex numbers C are an extension of the reals R , and the reals R are an extension of the rationals Q. -RRB- Classifying the possible extensions of a given number field is a difficult and partially open problem .
Abelian extensions -- that is , extensions L of K such that the Galois group Gal -LRB- L/K -RRB- of L over K is an abelian group -- are relatively well understood .
If certain algebraic objects -LRB- say , rational or integer solutions to certain equations -RRB- can be shown to be in the tail of certain sensibly defined distributions , it follows that there must be few of them ; this is a very concrete non-probabilistic statement following from a probabilistic one .
Here the letter Z comes from German Zahl , meaning ` number ' .
The set of integers forms a ring with the operations addition and multiplication .
During the 19th century , mathematicians began to develop many different abstractions which share certain properties of numbers and may be seen as extending the concept .
Among the first were the hypercomplex numbers , which consist of various extensions or modifications of the complex number system .
Today , number systems are considered important special examples of much more general categories such as rings and fields , and the application of the term `` number '' is a matter of convention , without fundamental significance .
Bones and other artifacts have been discovered with marks cut into them that many believe are tally marks .
These tally marks may have been used for counting elapsed time , such as numbers of days , lunar cycles or keeping records of quantities , such as of animals .
The earliest fleeting reference to square roots of negative numbers occurred in the work of the mathematician and inventor Heron of Alexandria in the 1st century AD , when he considered the volume of an impossible frustum of a pyramid .
They became more prominent when in the 16th century closed formulas for the roots of third and fourth degree polynomials were discovered by Italian mathematicians such as Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia and Gerolamo Cardano .
It was soon realized that these formulas , even if one was only interested in real solutions , sometimes required the manipulation of square roots of negative numbers .
In set theory , which is capable of acting as an axiomatic foundation for modern mathematics , natural numbers can be represented by classes of equivalent sets .
For instance , the number 3 can be represented as the class of all sets that have exactly three elements .
Alternatively , in Peano Arithmetic , the number 3 is represented as sss0 , where s is the `` successor '' function -LRB- i.e. , 3 is the third successor of 0 -RRB- .
Many different representations are possible ; all that is needed to formally represent 3 is to inscribe a certain symbol or pattern of symbols three times .
The naming of a particular species , including which genus -LRB- and higher taxa -RRB- it is placed in , is a hypothesis about the evolutionary relationships and distinguishability of that group of organisms .
As further information comes to hand , the hypothesis may be confirmed or refuted .
Sometimes , especially in the past when communication was more difficult , taxonomists working in isolation have given two distinct names to individual organisms later identified as the same species .
When two named species are discovered to be of the same species , the older species name is usually retained , and the newer species name dropped , a process called synonymization , or colloquially , as lumping .
Dividing a taxon into multiple , often new , taxa is called splitting .
Taxonomists are often referred to as `` lumpers '' or `` splitters '' by their colleagues , depending on their personal approach to recognizing differences or commonalities between organisms .
The species concept is further weakened by the existence of microspecies , groups of organisms , including many plants , with very little genetic variability , usually forming species aggregates .
Natural hybridisation presents a challenge to the concept of a reproductively isolated species , as fertile hybrids permit gene flow between two populations .
For example , the carrion crow Corvus corone and the hooded crow Corvus cornix appear and are classified as separate species , yet they hybridise freely where their geographical ranges overlap .
Unlike the Biological Species Concept , a cladistic species does not rely on reproductive isolation , so it is independent of processes that are integral in other concepts .
The concept may lead to splitting of existing species , for example of Bovidae , into many new ones .
When observers in the Early Modern period began to develop systems of organization for living things , they placed each kind of animal or plant into a context .
Many of these early delineation schemes would now be considered whimsical : schemes included consanguinity based on colour -LRB- all plants with yellow flowers -RRB- or behaviour -LRB- snakes , scorpions and certain biting ants -RRB- .
No surer criterion for determining species has occurred to me than the distinguishing features that perpetuate themselves in propagation from seed .
Thus , no matter what variations occur in the individuals or the species , if they spring from the seed of one and the same plant , they are accidental variations and not such as to distinguish a species ... Animals likewise that differ specifically preserve their distinct species permanently ; one species never springs from the seed of another nor vice versa .
For example , a boosted fission weapon is a fission bomb that increases its explosive yield through a small amount of fusion reactions , but it is not a fusion bomb .
In the boosted bomb , the neutrons produced by the fusion reactions serve primarily to increase the efficiency of the fission bomb .
There are two types of boosted fission bomb : internally boosted , in which a deuterium-tritium mixture is injected into the bomb core , and externally boosted , in which concentric shells of lithium-deuteride and depleted uranium are layered on the outside of the fission bomb core .
Some weapons are designed for special purposes ; a neutron bomb is a thermonuclear weapon that yields a relatively small explosion but a relatively large amount of neutron radiation ; such a device could theoretically be used to cause massive casualties while leaving infrastructure mostly intact and creating a minimal amount of fallout .
The detonation of any nuclear weapon is accompanied by a blast of neutron radiation .
Surrounding a nuclear weapon with suitable materials -LRB- such as cobalt or gold -RRB- creates a weapon known as a salted bomb .
This device can produce exceptionally large quantities of long-lived radioactive contamination .
It has been conjectured that such a device could serve as a `` doomsday weapon '' because such a large quantity of radioactivities with half-lives of decades , lifted into the stratosphere where wind currents would distribute it around the globe , would make all life on the planet extinct .
More preferable from a strategic point of view is a nuclear weapon mounted onto a missile , which can use a ballistic trajectory to deliver the warhead over the horizon .
Although even short-range missiles allow for a faster and less vulnerable attack , the development of long-range intercontinental ballistic missiles -LRB- ICBMs -RRB- and submarine-launched ballistic missiles -LRB- SLBMs -RRB- has given some nations the ability to plausibly deliver missiles anywhere on the globe with a high likelihood of success .
Nuclear weapons have been used twice in nuclear warfare , both times by the United States against Japan near the end of World War II .
On August 6 , 1945 , the U.S. Army Air Forces detonated a uranium gun-type fission bomb nicknamed `` Little Boy '' over the Japanese city of Hiroshima ; three days later , on August 9 , the U.S. Army Air Forces detonated a plutonium implosion-type fission bomb codenamed `` Fat Man '' over the Japanese city of Nagasaki .
The bombings resulted in the deaths of approximately 200,000 civilians and military personnel from acute injuries sustained from the explosions .
The ethics of the bombings and their role in Japan 's surrender remain the subject of scholarly and popular debate .
Peace movements emerged in Japan and in 1954 they converged to form a unified `` Japanese Council Against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs '' .
Japanese opposition to nuclear weapons tests in the Pacific Ocean was widespread , and `` an estimated 35 million signatures were collected on petitions calling for bans on nuclear weapons '' .
In fission weapons , a mass of fissile material -LRB- enriched uranium or plutonium -RRB- is assembled into a supercritical mass -- the amount of material needed to start an exponentially growing nuclear chain reaction -- either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another -LRB- the `` gun '' method -RRB- or by compressing using explosive lenses a sub-critical sphere of material using chemical explosives to many times its original density -LRB- the `` implosion '' method -RRB- .
The latter approach is considered more sophisticated than the former and only the latter approach can be used if the fissile material is plutonium .
The last mass extinction occurred some 66 million years ago , when a meteorite collision probably triggered the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles , but spared small animals such as mammals .
Over the past 66 million years , mammalian life diversified .
Terrestrial weather occurs almost exclusively in the lower part of the atmosphere , and serves as a convective system for redistributing heat .
Ocean currents are another important factor in determining climate , particularly the major underwater thermohaline circulation which distributes heat energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions .
The major oceanic divisions are defined in part by the continents , various archipelagos , and other criteria : these divisions are -LRB- in descending order of size -RRB- the Pacific Ocean , the Atlantic Ocean , the Indian Ocean , the Southern Ocean , and the Arctic Ocean .
Smaller regions of the oceans are called seas , gulfs , bays and other names .
There are also salt lakes , which are smaller bodies of landlocked saltwater that are not interconnected with the World Ocean .
Over nine-tenths of the total biomass on Earth is plant life , on which animal life depends very heavily for its existence .
More than 2 million species of plant and animal life have been identified to date , and estimates of the actual number of existing species range from several million to well over 50 million .
The number of individual species of life is constantly in some degree of flux , with new species appearing and others ceasing to exist on a continual basis .
Earth is the only planet known to support life , and its natural features are the subject of many fields of scientific research .
Precipitation varies widely with location , from several metres of water per year to less than a millimetre .
71 percent of the Earth 's surface is covered by salt-water oceans .
The remainder consists of continents and islands , with most of the inhabited land in the Northern Hemisphere .
Matter is commonly defined as the substance of which physical objects are composed .
The visible components of the universe are now believed to compose only 4.9 percent of the total mass .
The remainder is believed to consist of 26.8 percent cold dark matter and 68.3 percent dark energy .
The behavior of matter and energy throughout the observable universe appears to follow well-defined physical laws .
These laws have been employed to produce cosmological models that successfully explain the structure and the evolution of the universe we can observe .
The mathematical expressions of the laws of physics employ a set of twenty physical constants that appear to be static across the observable universe .
The values of these constants have been carefully measured , but the reason for their specific values remains a mystery .
Earth is estimated to have formed 4.54 billion years ago from the solar nebula , along with the Sun and other planets .
The moon formed roughly 20 million years later .
Initially molten , the outer layer of the Earth cooled , resulting in the solid crust .
Outgassing and volcanic activity produced the primordial atmosphere .
Condensing water vapor , most or all of which came from ice delivered by comets , produced the oceans and other water sources .
The highly energetic chemistry is believed to have produced a self-replicating molecule around 4 billion years ago .
The distances and speeds that Peary claimed to have achieved once the last support party turned back seem incredible to many people , almost three times that which he had accomplished up to that point .
Peary 's account of a journey to the Pole and back while traveling along the direct line -- the only strategy that is consistent with the time constraints that he was facing -- is contradicted by Henson 's account of tortuous detours to avoid pressure ridges and open leads .
In 1985 Sir Edmund Hillary -LRB- the first man to stand on the summit of Mount Everest -RRB- and Neil Armstrong -LRB- the first man to stand on the moon -RRB- landed at the North Pole in a small twin-engined ski plane .
Hillary thus became the first man to stand at both poles and on the summit of Everest .
On 7 September 1991 the German research vessel Polarstern and the Swedish icebreaker Oden reached the North Pole as the first conventional powered vessels .
Both scientific parties and crew took oceanographic and geological samples and had a common tug of war and a football game on an ice floe .
Polarstern again reached the pole exactly 10 years later with the Healy .
In 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 Lada Niva Marshs -LRB- special very large wheeled versions made by BRONTO , Lada/Vaz 's experimental product division -RRB- were driven to the North Pole .
The 1998 expedition was dropped by parachute and completed the track to the North Pole .
The 2000 expedition departed from a Russian research base around 114 km from the Pole and claimed an average speed of 20 -- 15 km/h in an average temperature of − 30 degrees .
The first attempt at underwater exploration of the North Pole was made on 22 April 1998 by Russian firefighter and diver Andrei Rozhkov with the support of the Diving Club of Moscow State University , but ended in fatality .
The next attempted dive at the North Pole was organized the next year by the same diving club , and ended in success on 24 April 1999 .
The North Pole is substantially warmer than the South Pole because it lies at sea level in the middle of an ocean -LRB- which acts as a reservoir of heat -RRB- , rather than at altitude on a continental land mass .
Despite being an ice cap , it shares some characteristics with a tundra climate -LRB- ETf -RRB- due to the July and August temperatures peaking just above freezing .
However , experimental studies of electrophysiology , beginning in the early 20th century and reaching high productivity by the 1940s , showed that the nervous system contains many mechanisms for generating patterns of activity intrinsically , without requiring an external stimulus .
Neurons were found to be capable of producing regular sequences of action potentials , or sequences of bursts , even in complete isolation .
When intrinsically active neurons are connected to each other in complex circuits , the possibilities for generating intricate temporal patterns become far more extensive .
A modern conception views the function of the nervous system partly in terms of stimulus-response chains , and partly in terms of intrinsically generated activity patterns -- both types of activity interact with each other to generate the full repertoire of behavior .
Although for the simplest reflexes there are short neural paths from sensory neuron to motor neuron , there are also other nearby neurons that participate in the circuit and modulate the response .
Furthermore , there are projections from the brain to the spinal cord that are capable of enhancing or inhibiting the reflex .
The central nervous system functions to send signals from one cell to others , or from one part of the body to others and to receive feedback .
Malfunction of the nervous system can occur as a result of genetic defects , physical damage due to trauma or toxicity , infection or simply of ageing .
The medical specialty of neurology studies disorders of the nervous system and looks for interventions that can prevent or treat them .
In the peripheral nervous system , the most common problem is the failure of nerve conduction , which can be due to different causes including diabetic neuropathy and demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis .
All animals that have been studied show circadian fluctuations in neural activity , which control circadian alternations in behavior such as the sleep-wake cycle .
Experimental studies dating from the 1990s have shown that circadian rhythms are generated by a `` genetic clock '' consisting of a special set of genes whose expression level rises and falls over the course of the day .
Animals as diverse as insects and vertebrates share a similar genetic clock system .
The circadian clock is influenced by light but continues to operate even when light levels are held constant and no other external time-of-day cues are available .
The clock genes are expressed in many parts of the nervous system as well as many peripheral organs , but in mammals all of these `` tissue clocks '' are kept in synchrony by signals that emanate from a master timekeeper in a tiny part of the brain called the suprachiasmatic nucleus .
Induction of neural tissues causes formation of neural precursor cells , called neuroblasts .
In drosophila , neuroblasts divide asymmetrically , so that one product is a `` ganglion mother cell '' -LRB- GMC -RRB- , and the other is a neuroblast .
A GMC divides once , to give rise to either a pair of neurons or a pair of glial cells .
In all , a neuroblast is capable of generating an indefinite number of neurons or glia .
As of 2013 , the World Nuclear Association has said `` There is unprecedented interest in renewable energy , particularly solar and wind energy , which provide electricity without giving rise to any carbon dioxide emission .
Harnessing these for electricity depends on the cost and efficiency of the technology , which is constantly improving , thus reducing costs per peak kilowatt '' .
Like nuclear energy , renewable electricity supply , of primarily hydropower , in the 20-50 + % range has already been implemented in several European systems , albeit in the context of an integrated European grid system .
In 2012 , the share of electricity generated by all types of renewable sources in Germany was 21.9 % , compared to 16.0 % for nuclear power after Germany shut down 7-8 of its 18 nuclear reactors in 2011 .
In the United Kingdom , the amount of energy produced from renewable energy is expected to exceed that from nuclear power by 2018 , and Scotland plans to obtain all electricity from renewable energy by 2020 .
The majority of installed renewable energy across the world is in the form of hydro power .
The SM-1 Nuclear Power Plant , at Fort Belvoir , Virginia , was the first power reactor in the U.S. to supply electrical energy to a commercial grid -LRB- VEPCO -RRB- , in April 1957 , before Shippingport .
It underwent a steam explosion and meltdown in January 1961 , which killed its three operators .
In the Soviet Union at The Mayak Production Association facility there were a number of accidents , including an explosion , that released 50-100 tonnes of high-level radioactive waste , contaminating a huge territory in the eastern Urals and causing numerous deaths and injuries .
The Soviet regime kept this accident secret for about 30 years .
The event was eventually rated at 6 on the seven-level INES scale -LRB- third in severity only to the disasters at Chernobyl and Fukushima -RRB- .
Japan 's 2011 Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident , which occurred in a reactor design from the 1960s , prompted a re-examination of nuclear safety and nuclear energy policy in many countries .
Germany plans to close all its reactors by 2022 , and Italy has re-affirmed its ban on electric utilities generating , but not importing , fission derived electricity .
In 2011 the International Energy Agency halved its prior estimate of new generating capacity to be built by 2035 .
In 2013 Japan signed a deal worth $ 22 billion , in which Mitsubishi Heavy Industries would build four modern Atmea reactors for Turkey .
In August 2015 , following 4 years of near zero fission-electricity generation , Japan began restarting its fission fleet , after safety upgrades were completed , beginning with Sendai fission-electric station .
The World Nuclear Association has said that `` nuclear power generation suffered its biggest ever one-year fall through 2012 as the bulk of the Japanese fleet remained offline for a full calendar year '' .
Data from the International Atomic Energy Agency showed that nuclear power plants globally produced 2346 TWh of electricity in 2012 -- seven per cent less than in 2011 .
The figures illustrate the effects of a full year of 48 Japanese power reactors producing no power during the year .
Problems at Crystal River , Fort Calhoun and the two San Onofre units in the USA meant they produced no power for the full year , while in Belgium Doel 3 and Tihange 2 were out of action for six months .
Compared to 2010 , the nuclear industry produced 11 % less electricity in 2012 .
In 2015 , the IAEA reported that worldwide there were 67 civil fission-electric power reactors under construction in 15 countries including Gulf states such as the United Arab Emirates -LRB- UAE -RRB- .
Eight new grid connections were completed by China in 2015 and the most recently completed reactor to be connected to the electrical grid , as of January 2016 , was at the Kori Nuclear Power Plant in the Republic of Korea .
In the US , four new Generation III reactors were under construction at Vogtle and Summer station , while a fifth was nearing completion at Watts Bar station , all five were expected to become operational before 2020 .
In 2013 , four aging uncompetitive U.S reactors were closed .
According to the World Nuclear Association , the global trend is for new nuclear power stations coming online to be balanced by the number of old plants being retired .
Analysis of the economics of nuclear power must take into account who bears the risks of future uncertainties .
To date all operating nuclear power plants were developed by state-owned or regulated utility monopolies where many of the risks associated with construction costs , operating performance , fuel price , accident liability and other factors were borne by consumers rather than suppliers .
Many countries have now liberalized the electricity market where these risks , and the risk of cheaper competitors emerging before capital costs are recovered , are borne by plant suppliers and operators rather than consumers , which leads to a significantly different evaluation of the economics of new nuclear power plants .
The economics of new nuclear power plants is a controversial subject , since there are diverging views on this topic , and multibillion-dollar investments ride on the choice of an energy source .
Cost estimates also need to take into account plant decommissioning and nuclear waste storage costs .
On the other hand , measures to mitigate global warming , such as a carbon tax or carbon emissions trading , may favor the economics of nuclear power .
Used thorium fuel remains only a few hundreds of years radioactive , instead of tens of thousands of years .
Following the 2011 Japanese Fukushima nuclear disaster , authorities shut down the nation 's 54 nuclear power plants , but it has been estimated that if Japan had never adopted nuclear power , accidents and pollution from coal or gas plants would have caused more lost years of life .
As of 2013 , the Fukushima site remains highly radioactive , with some 160,000 evacuees still living in temporary housing , and some land will be unfarmable for centuries .
The difficult Fukushima disaster cleanup will take 40 or more years , and cost tens of billions of dollars .
Life cycle analysis -LRB- LCA -RRB- of carbon dioxide emissions show nuclear power as comparable to renewable energy sources .
According to the United Nations -LRB- UNSCEAR -RRB- , regular nuclear power plant operation including the nuclear fuel cycle causes radioisotope releases into the environment amounting to 0.0002 millisieverts -LRB- mSv -RRB- per year of public exposure as a global average .
-LRB- Such is small compared to variation in natural background radiation , which averages 2.4 mSv/a globally but frequently varies between 1 mSv/a and 13 mSv/a depending on a person 's location as determined by UNSCEAR -RRB- .
As of a 2008 report , the remaining legacy of the worst nuclear power plant accident -LRB- Chernobyl -RRB- is 0.002 mSv/a in global average exposure -LRB- a figure which was 0.04 mSv per person averaged over the entire populace of the Northern Hemisphere in the year of the accident in 1986 , although far higher among the most affected local populations and recovery workers -RRB- .
Climate change causing weather extremes such as heat waves , reduced precipitation levels and droughts can have a significant impact on all thermal power station infrastructure , including large biomass-electric and fission-electric stations alike , if cooling in these power stations , namely in the steam condenser is provided by certain freshwater sources .
While many thermal stations use indirect seawater cooling or cooling towers that in comparison use little to no freshwater , those that were designed to heat exchange with rivers and lakes , can run into economic problems .
The Ottoman Empire -LRB- / ˈɒtəmən / ; Ottoman Turkish : دولت عليه عثمانیه , Devlet-i ʿAlīye-i ʿOsmānīye ; Modern Turkish : Osmanlı İmparatorluğu or Osmanlı Devleti -RRB- , also known as the Turkish Empire , Ottoman Turkey , was an empire and a great power , founded at the end of the thirteenth century in northwestern Anatolia in the vicinity of Bilecik and Söğüt by the Oghuz Turkish tribal leader Osman .
After 1354 , the Ottomans crossed into Europe , and with the conquest of the Balkans the Ottoman Beylik was transformed into a transcontinental empire .
The Ottomans ended the Byzantine Empire with the 1453 conquest of Constantinople by Mehmed the Conqueror .
Female surgeons were also illustrated for the first time .
The Ottoman bashi-bazouks brutally suppressed the Bulgarian uprising of 1876 , massacring up to 100,000 people in the process .
The Russo-Turkish War -LRB- 1877 -- 78 -RRB- ended with a decisive victory for Russia .
As a result , Ottoman holdings in Europe declined sharply ; Bulgaria was established as an independent principality inside the Ottoman Empire , Romania achieved full independence .
Serbia and Montenegro finally gained complete independence , but with smaller territories .
In 1878 , Austria-Hungary unilaterally occupied the Ottoman provinces of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Novi Pazar .
The history of the Ottoman Empire during World War I began with the Ottoman surprise attack on the Russian Black Sea coast on 29 October 1914 .
Following the attack , Russia and its allies , France and Britain , declared war on the Ottomans .
In the late 19th century , the Ottoman legal system saw substantial reform .
This process of legal modernization began with the Edict of Gülhane of 1839 .
Specific land codes -LRB- 1858 -RRB- , civil codes -LRB- 1869 -- 1876 -RRB- , and a code of civil procedure also were enacted .
Sultan Abdülhamid II distrusted the admirals who sided with the reformist Midhat Pasha , and claimed that the large and expensive fleet was of no use against the Russians during the Russo-Turkish War .
He locked most of the fleet inside the Golden Horn , where the ships decayed for the next 30 years .
Following the Young Turk Revolution in 1908 , the Committee of Union and Progress sought to develop a strong Ottoman naval force .
The Ottoman Navy Foundation was established in 1910 to buy new ships through public donations .
The Ottoman Empire started preparing its first pilots and planes , and with the founding of the Aviation School -LRB- Tayyare Mektebi -RRB- in Yeşilköy on 3 July 1912 , the Empire began to tutor its own flight officers .
The founding of the Aviation School quickened advancement in the military aviation program , increased the number of enlisted persons within it , and gave the new pilots an active role in the Ottoman Army and Navy .
In May 1913 the world 's first specialized Reconnaissance Training Program was started by the Aviation School and the first separate reconnaissance division was established .
In June 1914 a new military academy , the Naval Aviation School -LRB- Bahriye Tayyare Mektebi -RRB- was founded .
With the outbreak of World War I , the modernization process stopped abruptly .
The Ottoman aviation squadrons fought on many fronts during World War I , from Galicia in the west to the Caucasus in the east and Yemen in the south .
Censuses of Ottoman territories only began in the early 19th century .
For example , the 1831 census only counted men and did not cover the whole empire .
For earlier periods estimates of size and distribution of the population are based on observed demographic patterns .
An electron configuration with two unpaired electrons , as is found in dioxygen orbitals -LRB- see the filled π * orbitals in the diagram -RRB- that are of equal energy -- i.e. , degenerate -- is a configuration termed a spin triplet state .
Dioxygen is used in cellular respiration and many major classes of organic molecules in living organisms contain oxygen , such as proteins , nucleic acids , carbohydrates , and fats , as do the major constituent inorganic compounds of animal shells , teeth , and bone .
Conversely , oxygen is continuously replenished by photosynthesis , which uses the energy of sunlight to produce oxygen from water and carbon dioxide .
Oxygen is too chemically reactive to remain a free element in air without being continuously replenished by the photosynthetic action of living organisms .
Photolytic oxygen evolution occurs in the thylakoid membranes of photosynthetic organisms and requires the energy of four photons .
Many steps are involved , but the result is the formation of a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane , which is used to synthesize adenosine triphosphate -LRB- ATP -RRB- via photophosphorylation .
Since the primary cost of production is the energy cost of liquefying the air , the production cost will change as energy cost varies .
Oxygen storage methods include high pressure oxygen tanks , cryogenics and chemical compounds .
For reasons of economy , oxygen is often transported in bulk as a liquid in specially insulated tankers , since one liter of liquefied oxygen is equivalent to 840 liters of gaseous oxygen at atmospheric pressure and 20 ° C -LRB- 68 ° F -RRB- .
Such tankers are used to refill bulk liquid oxygen storage containers , which stand outside hospitals and other institutions that need large volumes of pure oxygen gas .
Liquid oxygen is passed through heat exchangers , which convert the cryogenic liquid into gas before it enters the building .
Oxygen is also stored and shipped in smaller cylinders containing the compressed gas ; a form that is useful in certain portable medical applications and oxy-fuel welding and cutting .
Robert Hooke , Ole Borch , Mikhail Lomonosov , and Pierre Bayen all produced oxygen in experiments in the 17th and the 18th century but none of them recognized it as a chemical element .
This may have been in part due to the prevalence of the philosophy of combustion and corrosion called the phlogiston theory , which was then the favored explanation of those processes .
Till the mid 1950s , it was acceptable to produce operas in translations even if these had not been authorized by the composer or the original librettists .
For example , opera houses in Italy routinely staged Wagner in Italian .
After WWII , opera scholarship improved , artists refocused on the original versions , and translations fell out of favor .
Prince Wilhelm became King of Prussia upon his brother Frederick Wilhelm IV 's death in 1861 .
The new monarch often came into conflict with the increasingly liberal Prussian Diet -LRB- Landtag -RRB- .
A crisis arose in 1862 , when the Diet refused to authorize funding for a proposed re-organization of the army .
The King 's ministers could not convince legislators to pass the budget , and the King was unwilling to make concessions .
Wilhelm threatened to abdicate in favour of his son Crown Prince Frederick William , who opposed his doing so , believing that Bismarck was the only politician capable of handling the crisis .
However , Wilhelm was ambivalent about appointing a person who demanded unfettered control over foreign affairs .
It was in September 1862 , when the Abgeordnetenhaus -LRB- House of Deputies -RRB- overwhelmingly rejected the proposed budget , that Wilhelm was persuaded to recall Bismarck to Prussia on the advice of Roon .
On 23 September 1862 , Wilhelm appointed Bismarck Minister President and Foreign Minister .
German unification had been a major objective of the revolutions of 1848 , when representatives of the German states met in Frankfurt and drafted a constitution , creating a federal union with a national parliament to be elected by universal male suffrage .
In April 1849 , the Frankfurt Parliament offered the title of Emperor to King Frederick William IV .
Fearing the opposition of the other German princes and the military intervention of Austria and Russia , the King renounced this popular mandate .
Thus , the Frankfurt Parliament ended in failure for the German liberals .
Still , a turn of events eventually led to his breaking with Wilhelm .
Bismarck , feeling pressured and unappreciated by the Emperor and undermined by ambitious advisers , refused to sign a proclamation regarding the protection of workers along with Wilhelm , as was required by the German constitution .
His refusal to sign was apparently to protest Wilhelm 's ever increasing interference with Bismarck 's previously unquestioned authority .
Bismarck also worked behind the scenes to break the Continental labour council on which Wilhelm had set his heart .
In a parliamentary state , the head of government depends on the confidence of the parliamentary majority and has the right to form coalitions to ensure their policies have majority support .
However , in Germany , the Chancellor depended on the confidence of the Emperor alone , and Wilhelm believed that the Emperor had the right to be informed before his minister 's meeting .
After a heated argument in Bismarck 's office , Wilhelm -- to whom Bismarck had shown a letter from Tsar Alexander III describing Wilhelm as a `` badly brought-up boy '' -- stormed out , after first ordering the rescinding of the Cabinet Order of 1851 , which had forbidden Prussian Cabinet Ministers from reporting directly to the King of Prussia and required them instead to report via the Chancellor .
Bismarck , forced for the first time into a situation that he could not use to his advantage , wrote a blistering letter of resignation , decrying Wilhelm 's interference in foreign and domestic policy .
The letter , however , was published only after Bismarck 's death .
In December 1897 , Wilhelm visited Bismarck for the last time .
Bismarck again warned him about the dangers of improvising government policy based on the intrigues of courtiers and militarists :
Evans says he was `` intimidating and unscrupulous , playing to others ' frailties , not their strengths . ''
British historians , including Steinberg , Evans , Taylor , Palmer and Crankshaw , see Bismarck as an ambivalent figure , undoubtedly a man of great skill but who left no lasting system in place to guide successors less skilled than himself .
Being a committed monarchist himself , Bismarck allowed no effective constitutional check on the power of the Emperor , thus placing a time bomb in the foundation of the Germany that he created .
Between 1862 and 1867 , Liverpool held an annual Grand Olympic Festival .
Devised by John Hulley and Charles Melly , these games were the first to be wholly amateur in nature and international in outlook , although only ` gentlemen amateurs ' could compete .
In 1865 Hulley , Brookes and E.G. Ravenstein founded the National Olympian Association in Liverpool , a forerunner of the British Olympic Association .
Its articles of foundation provided the framework for the International Olympic Charter .
In 1866 , a national Olympic Games in Great Britain was organised at London 's Crystal Palace .
The first Games held under the auspices of the IOC was hosted in the Panathenaic Stadium in Athens in 1896 .
The Games brought together 14 nations and 241 athletes who competed in 43 events .
Zappas and his cousin Konstantinos Zappas had left the Greek government a trust to fund future Olympic Games .
This trust was used to help finance the 1896 Games .
George Averoff contributed generously for the refurbishment of the stadium in preparation for the Games .
The Greek government also provided funding , which was expected to be recouped through the sale of tickets and from the sale of the first Olympic commemorative stamp set .
The Olympic Movement encompasses a large number of national and international sporting organisations and federations , recognised media partners , as well as athletes , officials , judges , and every other person and institution that agrees to abide by the rules of the Olympic Charter .
As the umbrella organisation of the Olympic Movement , the International Olympic Committee -LRB- IOC -RRB- is responsible for selecting the host city , overseeing the planning of the Olympic Games , updating and approving the sports program , and negotiating sponsorship and broadcasting rights .
The first Olympic athlete to test positive for the use of performance-enhancing drugs was Hans-Gunnar Liljenwall , a Swedish pentathlete at the 1968 Summer Olympics , who lost his bronze medal for alcohol use .
One of the most publicised doping-related disqualifications occurred after the 1988 Summer Olympics where Canadian sprinter , Ben Johnson -LRB- who won the 100-metre dash -RRB- tested positive for stanozolol .
His gold medal was later stripped and awarded to the American runner-up Carl Lewis , who himself had tested positive for banned substances prior to the Olympics .
In addition to the United States , nations hosting multiple Winter Games are France with three , while Switzerland , Austria , Norway , Japan , Canada and Italy have hosted twice .
Among host cities , Lake Placid , Innsbruck and St. Moritz have played host to the Winter Olympic Games more than once , each holding that honour twice .
The most recent Winter Games were held in Sochi in 2014 , Russia 's first Winter Olympics and second Olympics overall .
The lexicon is a catalogue of words and terms that are stored in a speaker 's mind .
The lexicon consists of words and bound morphemes , which are parts of words that ca n't stand alone , like affixes .
In some analyses , compound words and certain classes of idiomatic expressions and other collocations are also considered to be part of the lexicon .
Lexicography , closely linked with the domain of semantics , is the science of mapping the words into an encyclopedia or a dictionary .
The creation and addition of new words -LRB- into the lexicon -RRB- is called coining or neologization , and the new words are called neologisms .
It is often believed that a speaker 's capacity for language lies in the quantity of words stored in the lexicon .
However , this is often considered a myth by linguists .
The capacity for the use of language is considered by many linguists to lie primarily in the domain of grammar , and to be linked with competence , rather than with the growth of vocabulary .
Even a very small lexicon is theoretically capable of producing an infinite number of sentences .
This may have the aim of establishing a linguistic standard , which can aid communication over large geographical areas .
It may also , however , be an attempt by speakers of one language or dialect to exert influence over speakers of other languages or dialects -LRB- see Linguistic imperialism -RRB- .
An extreme version of prescriptivism can be found among censors , who attempt to eradicate words and structures that they consider to be destructive to society .
Prescription , however , may be practised appropriately in the teaching of language , like in ELT , where certain fundamental grammatical rules and lexical terms need to be introduced to a second-language speaker who is attempting to acquire the language .
Although the term `` linguist '' in the sense of `` a student of language '' dates from 1641 , the term `` linguistics '' is first attested in 1847 .
4th century Sanskrit poet Kalidasa , credits Chandragupta Vikramaditya with having conquered about twenty one kingdoms , both in and outside India .
After finishing his campaign in the East and West India , Vikramaditya -LRB- Chandragupta II -RRB- proceeded northwards , subjugated the Parasikas , then the Hunas and the Kambojas tribes located in the west and east Oxus valleys respectively .
Thereafter , the king proceeds across the Himalaya and reduced the Kinnaras , Kiratas etc. and lands into India proper .
In 1500 , Nilakantha Somayaji of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics , in his Tantrasangraha , revised Aryabhata 's model .
In his Aryabhatiyabhasya , a commentary on Aryabhata 's Aryabhatiya , he developed a planetary model where Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter and Saturn orbit the Sun , which in turn orbits Earth , similar to the Tychonic system later proposed by Tycho Brahe in the late 16th century .
Most astronomers of the Kerala school who followed him accepted his planetary model .
The first confirmed discovery of an extrasolar planet orbiting an ordinary main-sequence star occurred on 6 October 1995 , when Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz of the University of Geneva announced the detection of an exoplanet around 51 Pegasi .
From then until the Kepler mission most known extrasolar planets were gas giants comparable in mass to Jupiter or larger as they were more easily detected .
The catalog of Kepler candidate planets consists mostly of planets the size of Neptune and smaller , down to smaller than Mercury .
Another student of Wundt , Edward Titchener , created the psychology program at Cornell University and advanced a doctrine of `` structuralist '' psychology .
Structuralism sought to analyze and classify different aspects of the mind , primarily through the method of introspection .
William James , John Dewey and Harvey Carr advanced a more expansive doctrine called functionalism , attuned more to human -- environment actions .
In 1890 James wrote an influential book , The Principles of Psychology , which expanded on the realm of structuralism , memorably described the human `` stream of consciousness '' , and interested many American students in the emerging discipline .
Dewey integrated psychology with social issues , most notably by promoting the cause progressive education to assimilate immigrants and inculcate moral values in children .
The Interamerican Society of Psychology , founded in 1951 , aspires to promote psychology and coordinate psychologists across the Western Hemisphere .
The European Federation of Professional Psychology Associations , founded in 1981 , represents 30 national associations with a total of 100,000 individual members .
At least 30 other international groups organize psychologists in different regions .
In some places , governments legally regulate who can provide psychological services or represent themselves as a `` psychologist '' .
The American Psychological Association defines a psychologist as someone with a doctoral degree in psychology .
Embraced and extended by Clark L. Hull , Edwin Guthrie , and others , behaviorism became a widely used research paradigm .
A new method of `` instrumental '' or `` operant '' conditioning added the concepts of reinforcement and punishment to the model of behavior change .
Radical behaviorists avoided discussing the inner workings of the mind , especially the unconscious mind , which they considered impossible to assess scientifically .
Operant conditioning was first described by Miller and Kanorski and popularized in the U.S. by B. F. Skinner , who emerged as a leading intellectual of the behaviorist movement .
Cognitive psychology studies cognition , the mental processes underlying mental activity .
Classical cognitive psychology is associated with a school of thought known as cognitivism , whose adherents argue for an information processing model of mental function , informed by functionalism and experimental psychology .
Humanistic psychology developed in the 1950s as a movement within academic psychology , in reaction to both behaviorism and psychoanalysis .
Humanism focused on uniquely human issues , such as free will , personal growth , self-actualization , self-identity , death , aloneness , freedom , and meaning .
Some founders of the humanistic school of thought were American psychologists Abraham Maslow , who formulated a hierarchy of human needs , and Carl Rogers , who created and developed client-centered therapy .
Later , positive psychology opened up humanistic themes to scientific modes of exploration .
Psychologists may also work on a diverse set of campaigns known broadly as psychological warfare .
Psychologically warfare chiefly involves the use of propaganda to influence enemy soldiers and civilians .
In the case of so-called black propaganda the propaganda is designed to seem like it originates from a different source .
The CIA 's MKULTRA program involved more individualized efforts at mind control , involving techniques such as hypnosis , torture , and covert involuntary administration of LSD .
The U.S. military used the name Psychological Operations -LRB- PSYOP -RRB- until 2010 , when these were reclassified as Military Information Support Operations -LRB- MISO -RRB- , part of Information Operations -LRB- IO -RRB- .
Psychologists are sometimes involved in assisting the interrogation and torture of suspects , though this has sometimes been denied by those involved and sometimes opposed by others .
Metrical rhythm generally involves precise arrangements of stresses or syllables into repeated patterns called feet within a line .
In Modern English verse the pattern of stresses primarily differentiate feet , so rhythm based on meter in Modern English is most often founded on the pattern of stressed and unstressed syllables -LRB- alone or elided -RRB- .
In the classical languages , on the other hand , while the metrical units are similar , vowel length rather than stresses define the meter .
Old English poetry used a metrical pattern involving varied numbers of syllables but a fixed number of strong stresses in each line .
Narrative poetry is a genre of poetry that tells a story .
Broadly it subsumes epic poetry , but the term `` narrative poetry '' is often reserved for smaller works , generally with more appeal to human interest .
Many scholars of Homer have concluded that his Iliad and Odyssey were composed from compilations of shorter narrative poems that related individual episodes .
It has been speculated that some features that distinguish poetry from prose , such as meter , alliteration and kennings , once served as memory aids for bards who recited traditional tales .
Other ancient epic poetry includes the Greek epics , the Iliad and the Odyssey ; the Avestan books , the Gathic Avesta and the Yasna ; the Roman national epic , Virgil 's Aeneid ; and the Indian epics , the Ramayana and the Mahabharata .
Epic poetry , including the Odyssey , the Gathas , and the Indian Vedas , appears to have been composed in poetic form as an aid to memorization and oral transmission , in prehistoric and ancient societies .
Prose poetry is a hybrid genre that shows attributes of both prose and poetry .
While some examples of earlier prose strike modern readers as poetic , prose poetry is commonly regarded as having originated in 19th-century France , where its practitioners included Aloysius Bertrand , Charles Baudelaire , Arthur Rimbaud and Stéphane Mallarmé .
Since the late 1980s especially , prose poetry has gained increasing popularity , with entire journals , such as The Prose Poem : An International Journal , Contemporary Haibun Online , and Haibun Today devoted to that genre and its hybrids .
Latin American poets of the 20th century who wrote prose poems include Octavio Paz and Giannina Braschi
The three areas are grouped together because of their interrelationships , the similarity of methods used , and the commonality of their relevant energy scales .
All three areas include both classical , semi-classical and quantum treatments ; they can treat their subject from a microscopic view -LRB- in contrast to a macroscopic view -RRB- .
Numerous possibilities and discoveries are anticipated to emerge from new data from the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope over the upcoming decade and vastly revise or clarify existing models of the universe .
In particular , the potential for a tremendous discovery surrounding dark matter is possible over the next several years .
Fermi will search for evidence that dark matter is composed of weakly interacting massive particles , complementing similar experiments with the Large Hadron Collider and other underground detectors .
These complex phenomena have received growing attention since the 1970s for several reasons , including the availability of modern mathematical methods and computers , which enabled complex systems to be modeled in new ways .
Complex physics has become part of increasingly interdisciplinary research , as exemplified by the study of turbulence in aerodynamics and the observation of pattern formation in biological systems .
In the 1932 Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics , Horace Lamb said :
Languages do not generally allow words or syllables to be built of any arbitrary sequences of phonemes ; there are phonotactic restrictions on which sequences of phonemes are possible and in which environments certain phonemes can occur .
Phonemes that are significantly limited by such restrictions may be called restricted phonemes .
An example of the problems arising from the biuniqueness requirement is provided by the phenomenon of flapping in North American English .
This may cause either / t / or / d / -LRB- in the appropriate environments -RRB- to be realized with the phone -LSB- ɾ -RSB- -LRB- an alveolar flap -RRB- .
For example , the same flap sound may be heard in the words hitting and bidding , although it is clearly intended to realize the phoneme / t / in the first word and / d / in the second .
This appears to contradict biuniqueness .
A phoneme might be represented by a combination of two or more letters -LRB- digraph , trigraph , etc. -RRB- , like <sh> in English or <sch> in German -LRB- both representing phonemes / ʃ / -RRB- .
Also a single letter may represent two phonemes , as in English <x> representing / gz / or / ks / .
There may also exist spelling/pronunciation rules -LRB- such as those for the pronunciation of <c> in Italian -RRB- that further complicate the correspondence of letters to phonemes , although they need not affect the ability to predict the pronunciation from the spelling and vice versa , provided the rules are known .
Primates exploit a variety of food sources .
It has been said that many characteristics of modern primates , including humans , derive from an early ancestor 's practice of taking most of its food from the tropical canopy .
Most primates include fruit in their diets to obtain easily digested carbohydrates and lipids for energy .
Primates in the suborder Strepsirrhini -LRB- non-tarsier prosimians -RRB- are able to synthesize vitamin C , like most other mammals , while primates of the suborder Haplorrhini -LRB- tarsiers , monkeys and apes -RRB- have lost this ability , and require the vitamin in their diet .
All groups with scientific names are monophyletic -LRB- that is , they are clades -RRB- , and the sequence of scientific classification reflects the evolutionary history of the related lineages .
Groups that are traditionally named are shown on the right ; they form an `` ascending series '' -LRB- per Clark , see above -RRB- , and several groups are paraphyletic :
A variety of methods are deployed in politics , which include promoting or forcing one 's own political views among people , negotiation with other political subjects , making laws , and exercising force , including warfare against adversaries .
Politics is exercised on a wide range of social levels , from clans and tribes of traditional societies , through modern local governments , companies and institutions up to sovereign states , to the international level .
The Romans conquered the Paris Basin in 52 BC and , after making the island a garrison camp , began extending their settlement in a more permanent way to Paris 's Left Bank .
The Gallo-Roman town was originally called Lutetia -LRB- more fully , Lutetia Parisiorum , `` Lutetia of the Parisii '' -RRB- .
Immediately after the War The Saint-Germain-des-Pres quarter and the nearby Saint-Michel quarter became home to many small jazz clubs , mostly found in cellars because of a lack of space ; these included the Caveau des Lorientais , the Club Saint-Germain , the Rose Rouge , the Vieux-Colombier , and the most famous , Le Tabou .
Most of the clubs closed by the early 1960s , as musical tastes shifted toward rock and roll .
Today , thanks to Paris 's cosmopolitan population , every French regional cuisine and almost every national cuisine in the world can be found there ; the city has more than 9,000 restaurants .
The Michelin Guide has been a standard guide to French restaurants since 1900 , awarding its highest award , three stars , to the best restaurants in France .
These include both restaurants which serve classical French cuisine , such as L'Ambroisie in the Place des Vosges , and those which serve non-traditional menus , such as L'Astrance , which combines French and Asian cuisines .
Several of France 's most famous chefs , including Pierre Gagnaire , Alain Ducasse , Yannick Alléno and Alain Passard , have three-star restaurants in Paris .
Other academic libraries include Interuniversity Pharmaceutical Library , Leonardo da Vinci University Library , Paris School of Mines Library , and the René Descartes University Library .
By the end of the 12th century , Paris had become the political , economic , religious , and cultural capital of France .
The Palais de la Cité , the royal residence , was located at the western end of the Île de la Cité .
In 1163 , during the reign of Louis VII , Maurice de Sully , bishop of Paris , undertook the construction of the Notre Dame Cathedral at its eastern extremity .
The Left Bank was the site of the University of Paris , a corporation of students and teachers formed in the mid-12th century to train scholars first in theology , and later in canon law , medicine and the arts .
The central area of the city along the Seine River is classified as a UNESCO Heritage Site and includes many notable monuments , including Notre Dame Cathedral -LRB- 12th century to 13th century -RRB- ; the Sainte-Chapelle -LRB- 13th century -RRB- ; the Eiffel Tower -LRB- 1889 -RRB- ; the Grand Palais and Petit Palais -LRB- 1900 -RRB- ; and the Basilica of Sacré-Cœur in Montmartre -LRB- 1914 -RRB- .
In 2015 , Paris received 22.2 million visitors , making it one of the world 's top tourist destinations .
Paris has been represented 22 times in World 's Fairs and Expositions since 1798 and is also known for its fashion , particularly the twice-yearly Paris Fashion Week , and for its haute cuisine and three-star restaurants .
Most of France 's major universities and grandes écoles are located in Paris , as are France 's major newspapers , including Le Monde , Le Figaro , and Libération .
Most French rulers since the Middle Ages made a point of leaving their mark on a city that , contrary to many other of the world 's capitals , has never been destroyed by catastrophe or war .
In modernising its infrastructure through the centuries , Paris has preserved even its earliest history in its street map .
At its origin , before the Middle Ages , the city was composed around several islands and sandbanks in a bend of the Seine ; of those , two remain today : the île Saint-Louis , the île de la Cité ; a third one is the 1827 artificially created île aux Cygnes .
Paris urban tissue began to fill and overflow its 1860 limits from around the 1920s , and because of its density , it has seen few modern constructions since then .
Sixty-two percent of its buildings date from 1949 and before , 20 percent were built between 1949 and 1974 , and only 18 percent of the buildings remaining were built after that date .
The Paris agglomeration 's urban sociology is basically that of 19th century Paris : its fortuned classes are situated in its west and southwest , and its middle-to-lower classes are in its north and east .
The remaining areas are mostly middle-class citizenry dotted with islands of fortuned populations located there due to reasons of historical importance , namely Saint-Maur-des-Fossés to the east and Enghien-les-Bains to the north of Paris .
Inhabitants are known in English as `` Parisians '' and in French as Parisiens -LRB- -LSB- paʁizjɛ̃ -RSB- -RRB- .
One important trend in language design for programming large-scale systems during the 1980s was an increased focus on the use of modules or large-scale organizational units of code .
Modula-2 , Ada , and ML all developed notable module systems in the 1980s , which were often wedded to generic programming constructs .
It may seem odd to some professional programmers that C could be `` weakly , statically typed '' .
However , notice that the use of the generic pointer , the void * pointer , does allow for casting of pointers to other pointers without needing to do an explicit cast .
This is extremely similar to somehow casting an array of bytes to any kind of datatype in C without using an explicit cast , such as -LRB- int -RRB- or -LRB- char -RRB- .
One common trend in the development of programming languages has been to add more ability to solve problems using a higher level of abstraction .
The earliest programming languages were tied very closely to the underlying hardware of the computer .
As new programming languages have developed , features have been added that let programmers express ideas that are more remote from simple translation into underlying hardware instructions .
Because programmers are less tied to the complexity of the computer , their programs can do more computing with less effort from the programmer .
An implementation of a programming language provides a way to write programs in that language and execute them on one or more configurations of hardware and software .
It is generally possible to implement a language using either technique .
The toy piano manufacturer Schoenhut started manufacturing both grands and uprights with only 44 or 49 keys , and shorter distance between the keyboard and the pedals .
The pianos were introduced to their product line in response to numerous requests in favor of it .
Many classical music composers , including Haydn , Mozart , and Beethoven , composed for the fortepiano , a rather different instrument than the modern piano .
Even composers of the Romantic movement , like Liszt , Chopin , Robert Schumann , Felix Mendelssohn , and Johannes Brahms , wrote for pianos substantially different from 2010-era modern pianos .
Contemporary musicians may adjust their interpretation of historical compositions from the 1600s to the 1800s to account for sound quality differences between old and new instruments or to changing performance practice .
From left to right across the four blocks of the long - or 32-column form of the periodic table are a series of linking or bridging groups of elements , located approximately between each block .
These groups , like the metalloids , show properties in between , or that are a mixture of , groups to either side .
Lutetium and lawrencium , at the end of the end of the f block , may constitute another linking or bridging group .
Lutetium behaves chemically as a lanthanide but shows a mix of lanthanide and transition metal physical properties .
The coinage metals in group 11 -LRB- copper , silver , and gold -RRB- are chemically capable of acting as either transition metals or main group metals .
The volatile group 12 metals , zinc , cadmium and mercury are sometimes regarded as linking the d block to the p block .
In 1864 , Julius Lothar Meyer , a German chemist , published a table with 44 elements arranged by valency .
The table showed that elements with similar properties often shared the same valency .
Concurrently , William Odling -LRB- an English chemist -RRB- published an arrangement of 57 elements , ordered on the basis of their atomic weights .
With some irregularities and gaps , he noticed what appeared to be a periodicity of atomic weights among the elements and that this accorded with `` their usually received groupings '' .
Odling alluded to the idea of a periodic law but did not pursue it .
Although minute quantities of some transuranic elements occur naturally , they were all first discovered in laboratories .
Their production has expanded the periodic table significantly , the first of these being neptunium , synthesized in 1939 .
There have been controversies concerning the acceptance of competing discovery claims for some elements , requiring independent review to determine which party has priority , and hence naming rights .
In 2010 , a joint Russia -- US collaboration at Dubna , Moscow Oblast , Russia , claimed to have synthesized six atoms of tennessine -LRB- element 117 -RRB- , making it the most recently claimed discovery .
It , along with nihonium -LRB- element 113 -RRB- , moscovium -LRB- element 115 -RRB- , and oganesson -LRB- element 118 -RRB- , are the four most recently named elements , whose names all became official on 28 November 2016 .
In other tables , lutetium and lawrencium are the remaining group 3 members .
Early techniques for chemically separating scandium , yttrium and lutetium relied on the fact that these elements occurred together in the so-called `` yttrium group '' whereas La and Ac occurred together in the `` cerium group '' .
Accordingly , lutetium rather than lanthanum was assigned to group 3 by some chemists in the 1920s and 30s .
Several physicists in the 1950s and 60s favoured lutetium , in light of a comparison of several of its physical properties with those of lanthanum .
This arrangement , in which lanthanum is the first member of the f-block , is disputed by some authors since lanthanum lacks any f-electrons .
As for lawrencium , its gas phase atomic electron configuration was confirmed in 2015 as -LSB- Rn -RSB- 5f147s27p1 .
Such a configuration represents another periodic table anomaly , regardless of whether lawrencium is located in the f-block or the d-block , as the only potentially applicable p-block position has been reserved for nihonium with its predicted configuration of -LSB- Rn -RSB- 5f146d107s27p1 .
In the standard periodic table , the elements are listed in order of increasing atomic number -LRB- the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom -RRB- .
A new row -LRB- period -RRB- is started when a new electron shell has its first electron .
Columns -LRB- groups -RRB- are determined by the electron configuration of the atom ; elements with the same number of electrons in a particular subshell fall into the same columns -LRB- e.g. oxygen and selenium are in the same column because they both have four electrons in the outermost p-subshell -RRB- .
Elements with similar chemical properties generally fall into the same group in the periodic table , although in the f-block , and to some respect in the d-block , the elements in the same period tend to have similar properties , as well .
Along the Pacific Ocean 's irregular western margins lie many seas , the largest of which are the Celebes Sea , Coral Sea , East China Sea , Philippine Sea , Sea of Japan , South China Sea , Sulu Sea , Tasman Sea , and Yellow Sea .
The Indonesian Seaway -LRB- including the Strait of Malacca and Torres Strait -RRB- joins the Pacific and the Indian Ocean to the west , and Drake Passage and the Strait of Magellan link the Pacific with the Atlantic Ocean on the east .
To the north , the Bering Strait connects the Pacific with the Arctic Ocean .
In 1564 , five Spanish ships consisting of 379 explorers crossed the ocean from Mexico led by Miguel López de Legazpi and sailed to the Philippines and Mariana Islands .
For the remainder of the 16th century , Spanish influence was paramount , with ships sailing from Mexico and Peru across the Pacific Ocean to the Philippines , via Guam , and establishing the Spanish East Indies .
The Manila galleons operated for two and a half centuries linking Manila and Acapulco , in one of the longest trade routes in history .
Spanish expeditions also discovered Tuvalu , the Marquesas , the Cook Islands , the Solomon Islands , and the Admiralty Islands in the South Pacific .
Lilius 's proposal included reducing the number of leap years in four centuries from 100 to 97 , by making three out of four centurial years common instead of leap years .
He also produced an original and practical scheme for adjusting the epacts of the moon when calculating the annual date of Easter , solving a long-standing obstacle to calendar reform .
Lilius 's work was expanded upon by Christopher Clavius in a closely argued , 800-page volume .
Clavius 's opinion was that the correction should take place in one move , and it was this advice which prevailed with Gregory .
Usually , the mapping of new dates onto old dates with a start of year adjustment works well with little confusion for events that happened before the introduction of the Gregorian calendar .
The error shifts by about a quarter of a day per year .
This causes a correction in the years 1700 , 1800 , 1900 , 2100 , 2200 , and 2300 .
Paleoptera and Neoptera are the winged orders of insects differentiated by the presence of hardened body parts called sclerites , and in the Neoptera , muscles that allow their wings to fold flatly over the abdomen .
Neoptera can further be divided into incomplete metamorphosis-based -LRB- Polyneoptera and Paraneoptera -RRB- and complete metamorphosis-based groups .
It has proved difficult to clarify the relationships between the orders in Polyneoptera because of constant new findings calling for revision of the taxa .
For example , the Paraneoptera have turned out to be more closely related to the Endopterygota than to the rest of the Exopterygota .
The recent molecular finding that the traditional louse orders Mallophaga and Anoplura are derived from within Psocoptera has led to the new taxon Psocodea .
Phasmatodea and Embiidina have been suggested to form the Eukinolabia .
Mantodea , Blattodea , and Isoptera are thought to form a monophyletic group termed Dictyoptera .
The foregut is lined with a cuticular lining made of chitin and proteins as protection from tough food .
The foregut includes the buccal cavity -LRB- mouth -RRB- , pharynx , esophagus and crop and proventriculus -LRB- any part may be highly modified -RRB- which both store food and signify when to continue passing onward to the midgut .
The insect circulatory system utilizes hemolymph , a tissue analogous to blood that circulates in the interior of the insect body , while remaining in direct contact with the animal 's tissues .
In addition to hemocytes , the plasma also contains many chemicals .
Immature insects that go through incomplete metamorphosis are called nymphs or in the case of dragonflies and damselflies , also naiads .
With each molt , nymphs grow larger and become more similar in appearance to adult insects .
Some insects display a rudimentary sense of numbers , such as the solitary wasps that prey upon a single species .
The mother wasp lays her eggs in individual cells and provides each egg with a number of live caterpillars on which the young feed when hatched .
Some species of wasp always provide five , others twelve , and others as high as twenty-four caterpillars per cell .
The male solitary wasp in the genus Eumenes is smaller than the female , so the mother of one species supplies him with only five caterpillars ; the larger female receives ten caterpillars in her cell .
Most insects , except some species of cave crickets , are able to perceive light and dark .
The eyes may include simple eyes or ocelli as well as compound eyes of varying sizes .
Many species are able to detect light in the infrared , ultraviolet and the visible light wavelengths .
Color vision has been demonstrated in many species and phylogenetic analysis suggests that UV-green-blue trichromacy existed from at least the Devonian period between 416 and 359 million years ago .
Although pest insects attract the most attention , many insects are beneficial to the environment and to humans .
Some insects , like wasps , bees , butterflies and ants , pollinate flowering plants .
Another solution , as shown in Delaware , has been to raise native plants to help support native pollinators like L. vierecki .
Insects also produce useful substances such as honey , wax , lacquer and silk .
Honey bees have been cultured by humans for thousands of years for honey , although contracting for crop pollination is becoming more significant for beekeepers .
The silkworm has greatly affected human history , as silk-driven trade established relationships between China and the rest of the world .
As insects gather nectar from different plants of the same species , they also spread pollen from plants on which they have previously fed .
This greatly increases plants ' ability to cross-pollinate , which maintains and possibly even improves their evolutionary fitness .
This ultimately affects humans since ensuring healthy crops is critical to agriculture .
As well as pollination ants help with seed distribution of plants .
This helps to spread the plants which increases plant diversity .
This leads to an overall better environment .
A serious environmental problem is the decline of populations of pollinator insects , and a number of species of insects are now cultured primarily for pollination management in order to have sufficient pollinators in the field , orchard or greenhouse at bloom time .
The potato was first domesticated in the region of modern-day southern Peru and extreme northwestern Bolivia between 8000 and 5000 BC .
The following table shows the nutrient content of potato and other major staple foods , each in respective raw form .
Staple foods are not commonly eaten raw and are usually sprouted or cooked before eating .
In sprouted and cooked form , the relative nutritional and anti-nutritional contents of each of these grains may be different from the values reported in this table .
In the United States , potatoes have become one of the most widely consumed crops and thus have a variety of preparation methods and condiments .
French fries and often hash browns are commonly found in typical American fast-food burger joints and cafeterias .
One popular favorite involves a baked potato with cheddar cheese -LRB- or sour cream and chives -RRB- on top , and in New England `` smashed potatoes '' -LRB- a chunkier variation on mashed potatoes , retaining the peel -RRB- have great popularity .
Potato flakes are popular as an instant variety of mashed potatoes , which reconstitute into mashed potatoes by adding water , with butter or oil and salt to taste .
A regional dish of Central New York , salt potatoes are bite-size new potatoes boiled in water saturated with salt then served with melted butter .
At more formal dinners , a common practice includes taking small red potatoes , slicing them , and roasting them in an iron skillet .
Among American Jews , the practice of eating latkes -LRB- fried potato pancakes -RRB- is common during the festival of Hanukkah .
However , it is used in northern China where rice is not easily grown , with a popular dish being 青椒土豆丝 -LRB- qīng jiāo tǔ dòu sī -RRB- , made with green pepper , vinegar and thin slices of potato .
In the winter , roadside sellers in northern China will also sell roasted potatoes .
Piphilology is the practice of memorizing large numbers of digits of π , and world-records are kept by the Guinness World Records .
The record for memorizing digits of π , certified by Guinness World Records , is 70,000 digits , recited in India by Rajveer Meena in 9 hours and 27 minutes on 21 March 2015 .
In 2006 , Akira Haraguchi , a retired Japanese engineer , claimed to have recited 100,000 decimal places , but the claim was not verified by Guinness World Records .
In the Palais de la Découverte -LRB- a science museum in Paris -RRB- there is a circular room known as the pi room .
On its wall are inscribed 707 digits of π .
The digits are large wooden characters attached to the dome-like ceiling .
The digits were based on an 1853 calculation by English mathematician William Shanks , which included an error beginning at the 528th digit .
The error was detected in 1946 and corrected in 1949 .
Being an irrational number , π can not be expressed exactly as a fraction -LRB- equivalently , its decimal representation never ends and never settles into a permanent repeating pattern -RRB- .
Still , fractions such as 22/7 and other rational numbers are commonly used to approximate π .
The digits appear to be randomly distributed .
In particular , the digit sequence of π is conjectured to satisfy a specific kind of statistical randomness , but to date no proof of this has been discovered .
This transcendence of π implies that it is impossible to solve the ancient challenge of squaring the circle with a compass and straightedge .
The best known approximations to π dating before the Common Era were accurate to two decimal places ; this was improved upon in Chinese mathematics in particular by the mid first millennium , to an accuracy of seven decimal places .
After this , no further progress was made until the late medieval period .
Some Egyptologists have claimed that the ancient Egyptians used an approximation of π as 22/7 from as early as the Old Kingdom .
This claim has met with skepticism .
Machin reached 100 digits of π with this formula .
Other mathematicians created variants , now known as Machin-like formulae , that were used to set several successive records for calculating digits of π .
Machin-like formulae remained the best-known method for calculating π well into the age of computers , and were used to set records for 250 years , culminating in a 620-digit approximation in 1946 by Daniel Ferguson -- the best approximation achieved without the aid of a calculating device .
Here , the circumference of a circle is the arc length around the perimeter of the circle , a quantity which can be formally defined independently of geometry using limits , a concept in calculus .
For example , one may compute directly the arc length of the top half of the unit circle given in Cartesian coordinates by x2 + y2 = 1 , as the integral :
This formula , unlike others before it , can produce any individual hexadecimal digit of π without calculating all the preceding digits .
Individual binary digits may be extracted from individual hexadecimal digits , and octal digits can be extracted from one or two hexadecimal digits .
Variations of the algorithm have been discovered , but no digit extraction algorithm has yet been found that rapidly produces decimal digits .
An important application of digit extraction algorithms is to validate new claims of record π computations : After a new record is claimed , the decimal result is converted to hexadecimal , and then a digit extraction algorithm is used to calculate several random hexadecimal digits near the end ; if they match , this provides a measure of confidence that the entire computation is correct .
Unfortunately , the centrepieces of the pediment were destroyed even before Jacques Carrey created otherwise useful documentary drawings in 1674 , so all reconstructions are subject to conjecture and speculation .
The main Olympian gods must have stood around Zeus and Athena watching the wondrous event , with Hephaestus and Hera probably near them .
The Carrey drawings are instrumental in reconstructing the sculptural arrangement beyond the centre figures to the north and south .
The Parthenon became the fourth most important Christian pilgrimage destination in the Eastern Roman Empire after Constantinople , Ephesos , and Thessalonica .
In 1018 , the emperor Basil II went on a pilgrimage to Athens directly after his final victory over the Bulgarians for the sole purpose of worshipping at the Parthenon .
In medieval Greek accounts it is called the Temple of Theotokos Atheniotissa and often indirectly referred to as famous without explaining exactly which temple they were referring to , thus establishing that it was indeed well known .
Accounts written at the time conflict over whether this destruction was deliberate or accidental ; one such account , written by the German officer Sobievolski , states that a Turkish deserter revealed to Morosini the use to which the Turks had put the Parthenon expecting that the Venetians would not target a building of such historic importance .
Morosini was said to have responded by directing his artillery to aim at the Parthenon .
Subsequently , Morosini sought to loot sculptures from the ruin and caused further damage in the process .
Sculptures of Poseidon and Athena 's horses fell to the ground and smashed as his soldiers tried to detach them from the building 's west pediment .
Originally , romance literature was written in Old French , Anglo-Norman and Occitan , later , in English , in Italian and German .
During the early 13th century , romances were increasingly written as prose .
The Prose Lancelot or Vulgate Cycle includes passages from that period .
This collection indirectly led to Thomas Malory 's Le Morte d'Arthur of the early 1470s .
Prose became increasingly attractive , because It enabled writers to associate popular stories with serious histories traditionally composed in prose , and could also be more easily translated .
Prefaces and title pages of 17th -- and early 18th-century fiction acknowledged this pattern : histories could claim to be romances , but threaten to relate true events , as in the Roman à clef .
Other works could , conversely , claim to be factual histories , yet earn the suspicion that they were wholly invented .
A further differentiation was made between private and public history : Daniel Defoe 's Robinson Crusoe was , within this pattern , neither a `` romance '' nor a `` novel '' .
It smelled of romance , yet the preface stated that it should most certainly be read as a true private history .
The situation changed again from 1660s into the 1690s when works by French authors were published in Holland out of the reach of French censors .
Dutch publishing houses pirated of fashionable books from France and created a new market of political and scandalous fiction .
This led to a market of European rather than French fashions in the early 18th century .
Reform became the main goal of the second generation of 18th-century novelists who , by the mid-century , openly welcomed the change of climate that had first been promoted in journals such as The Spectator .
The Spectator Number 10 had stated that the aim was now `` to enliven morality with wit , and to temper wit with morality -LSB- ... -RSB- to bring philosophy out of the closets and libraries , schools and colleges , to dwell in clubs and assemblies , at tea-tables and coffeehouses '' -RRB- .
James Joyce 's Ulysses -LRB- 1922 -RRB- had a major influence on modern novelists , in the way that it replaced the 18th - and 19th-century narrator with a text that attempted to record inner thoughts : a `` stream of consciousness '' .
This term was first used by William James in1890 and is used -LRB- or the related interior monologue -RRB- by modernists like Dorothy Richardson , Marcel Proust , as well as , later Virginia Woolf and William Faulkner .
Also in the 1920s expressionist Alfred Döblin went in a different direction with Berlin Alexanderplatz -LRB- 1929 -RRB- , where interspersed non-fictional text fragments exist alongside the fictional material to create another new form of realism , which differs from that of stream-of-consciousness .
Popular literature holds the largest market share .
Romance fiction had an estimated $ 1.375 billion share in the US book market in 2007 .
Inspirational literature/religious literature followed with $ 819 million , science fiction/fantasy with $ 700 million , mystery with $ 650 million and then classic literary fiction with $ 466 million .
Its glyphs were formed by pressing the end of a reed stylus into moist clay , not by tracing lines in the clay with the stylus as had been done previously .
Pigs are one of four known mammalian species which possess mutations in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor that protect against snake venom .
Mongooses , honey badgers , hedgehogs , and pigs all have modifications to the receptor pocket which prevents the snake venom α-neurotoxin from binding .
These represent four separate , independent mutations .
In August 2015 , a study looked at over 100 pig genome sequences to ascertain their process of domestication .
The process of domestication was assumed to have been initiated by humans , involved few individuals and relied on reproductive isolation between wild and domestic forms .
The study found that the assumption of reproductive isolation with population bottlenecks was not supported .
The study indicated that pigs were domesticated separately in Western Asia and China , with Western Asian pigs introduced into Europe where they crossed with wild boar .
A model that fitted the data included a mixture with a now extinct ghost population of wild pigs during the Pleistocene .
The study also found that despite back-crossing with wild pigs , the genomes of domestic pigs have strong signatures of selection at DNA loci that affect behavior and morphology .
The study concluded that human selection for domestic traits likely counteracted the homogenizing effect of gene flow from wild boars and created domestication islands in the genome .
The same process may also apply to other domesticated animals .
Carioca -- Not a dialect , but sociolects of the fluminense variant spoken in an area roughly corresponding to Greater Rio de Janeiro .
It appeared after locals came in contact with the Portuguese aristocracy amidst the Portuguese royal family fled in the early 19th century .
There is actually a continuum between Vernacular countryside accents and the carioca sociolect , and the educated speech -LRB- in Portuguese norma culta , which most closely resembles other Brazilian Portuguese standards but with marked recent Portuguese influences , the nearest ones among the country 's dialects along florianopolitano -RRB- , so that not all people native to the state of Rio de Janeiro speak the said sociolect , but most carioca speakers will use the standard variant not influenced by it that is rather uniform around Brazil depending on context -LRB- emphasis or formality , for example -RRB- .
The Portuguese language is also the only Romance language that developed the clitic case mesoclisis : cf. dar-te-ei -LRB- I 'll give thee -RRB- , amar-te-ei -LRB- I 'll love you -RRB- , contactá-los-ei -LRB- I 'll contact them -RRB- .
It was also the only Romance language to retain the Latin synthetic pluperfect tense : eu estivera -LRB- I had been -RRB- , eu vivera -LRB- I had lived -RRB- , vós vivêreis -LRB- you had lived -RRB- .
Most of the lexicon of Portuguese is derived , directly or through other Romance languages , from Latin .
Nevertheless , because of its original Celtiberian heritage and later the participation of Portugal in the Age of Discovery , it has some Gallaecian words and adopted loanwords from all over the world .
Portuguese and Spanish are the only Ibero-Romance languages , and perhaps the only Romance languages with such thriving inter-language forms , in which visible and lively bilingual contact dialects and code-switching have formed , in which functional bilingual communication is achieved through attempting an approximation to the target foreign language -LRB- known as ` Portunhol ' -RRB- without a learned acquisition process , but nevertheless facilitates communication .
There is an emerging literature focused on such phenomena -LRB- including informal attempts of standardization of the linguistic continua and their usage -RRB- .
Portuguese has provided loanwords to many languages , such as Indonesian , Manado Malay , Malayalam , Sri Lankan Tamil and Sinhalese , Malay , Bengali , English , Hindi , Swahili , Afrikaans , Konkani , Marathi , Tetum , Xitsonga , Japanese , Lanc-Patuá -LRB- spoken in northern Brazil -RRB- , Esan and Sranan Tongo -LRB- spoken in Suriname -RRB- .
It left a strong influence on the língua brasílica , a Tupi -- Guarani language , which was the most widely spoken in Brazil until the 18th century , and on the language spoken around Sikka in Flores Island , Indonesia .
In nearby Larantuka , Portuguese is used for prayers in Holy Week rituals .
Building on the work of earlier Portuguese missionaries , the Dictionarium Anamiticum , Lusitanum et Latinum -LRB- Annamite -- Portuguese -- Latin dictionary -RRB- of Alexandre de Rhodes -LRB- 1651 -RRB- introduced the modern orthography of Vietnamese , which is based on the orthography of 17th-century Portuguese .
The Romanization of Chinese was also influenced by the Portuguese language -LRB- among others -RRB- , particularly regarding Chinese surnames ; one example is Mei .
During 1583 -- 88 Italian Jesuits Michele Ruggieri and Matteo Ricci created a Portuguese -- Chinese dictionary -- the first ever European -- Chinese dictionary .
Because of money laundering and overtaxing , he attempted to limit abuses and sent imperial investigators to supervise the ortoq businesses .
He decreed all merchants must pay commercial and property taxes , and he paid off all drafts drawn by high-ranking Mongol elites from the merchants .
During the rise of the Mongol Empire in the 13th century , the usually cold , parched steppes of Central Asia enjoyed their mildest , wettest conditions in more than a millennium .
It is thought that as a result , a rapid increase in the number of war horses and other livestock significantly enhanced Mongol military strength .
One of the more successful tactics employed by the Mongols was to wipe out urban populations that refused to surrender .
In the Mongol invasion of Rus ' , almost all major cities were destroyed .
If they chose to submit , the people were generally spared , though this was not guaranteed .
For example , the city of Hamadan in modern-day Iran was destroyed and every man , woman , and child executed by Mongol general Subadai , after surrendering to him but failing to have enough provisions for his Mongol scouting force .
Several days after the initial razing of the city , Subadai sent a force back to the burning ruins and the site of the massacre to kill any inhabitants of the city who had been away at the time of the initial slaughter and had returned in the meantime .
Mongolian armies made use of local peoples and their soldiers , often incorporating them into their armies .
Prisoners of war sometimes were given the choice between death and becoming part of the Mongol army to aid in future conquests .
In addition to intimidation tactics , the rapid expansion of the empire was facilitated by military hardiness -LRB- especially during bitterly cold winters -RRB- , military skill , meritocracy , and discipline .
The Crimean Khanate and other descendants , such as the Mughal royal family of South Asia , are also descended from Genghis Khan : Babur 's mother was a descendant -- whereas his father was directly descended from Timur -LRB- Tamerlane -RRB- .
In the West , Ögedei 's general Chormaqan destroyed Jalal ad-Din Mingburnu , the last shah of the Khwarizmian Empire .
The small kingdoms in Southern Persia voluntarily accepted Mongol supremacy .
In East Asia , there were a number of Mongolian campaigns into Goryeo Korea , but Ögedei 's attempt to annex the Korean Peninsula met with little success .
Gojong , the king of Goryeo , surrendered but later revolted and massacred Mongol darughachis -LRB- overseers -RRB- ; he then moved his imperial court from Gaeseong to Ganghwa Island .
Before Batu 's forces could continue into Vienna and northern Albania , news of Ögedei 's death in December 1241 brought a halt to the invasion .
As was customary in Mongol military tradition , all princes of Genghis 's line had to attend the kurultai to elect a successor .
Batu and his western Mongol army withdrew from Central Europe the next year .
The center of the Islamic Empire at the time was Baghdad , which had held power for 500 years but was suffering internal divisions .
When its caliph al-Mustasim refused to submit to the Mongols , Baghdad was besieged and captured by the Mongols in 1258 , an event considered as one of the more catastrophic events in the history of Islam , and sometimes compared to the rupture of the Kaaba .
With the destruction of the Abbasid Caliphate , Hulagu had an open route to Syria and moved against the other Muslim powers in the region .
In the southwestern Ilkhanate , Hulagu was loyal to his brother Kublai , but clashes with their cousin Berke , the ruler of the Golden Horde in the northwestern part of the empire , began in 1262 .
The suspicious deaths of Jochid princes in Hulagu 's service , unequal distribution of war booty , and Hulagu 's massacres of the Muslims increased the anger of Berke , who considered supporting a rebellion of the Georgian Kingdom against Hulagu 's rule in 1259 -- 1260 .
Berke also forged an alliance with the Egyptian Mamluks against Hulagu and supported Kublai 's rival claimant , Ariqboke .
In the south , after the fall of Xiangyang in 1273 , the Mongols sought the final conquest of the Song dynasty in South China .
In 1271 , Kublai renamed the new Mongol regime in China as the Yuan dynasty and sought to sinicize his image as Emperor of China to win the control of the Chinese people .
Kublai moved his headquarters to Dadu , the genesis for what later became the modern city of Beijing , although his establishment of a capital there was a controversial move to many Mongols who accused him of being too closely tied to Chinese culture .
Struggling for influence within the Golden Horde , Kaidu sponsored his own candidate Kobeleg against Bayan -LRB- r. 1299 -- 1304 -RRB- , the khan of the White Horde .
Bayan , after receiving military support from the Mongols in Russia , requested assistance from both Temür Khan and the Ilkhanate to organize a unified attack against Kaidu 's forces .
After a bloody battle with Temür 's armies near Zawkhan River in 1301 , the old valiant Kaidu died and was succeeded by Duwa .
The Mongol Empire had an ingenious and efficient mail system for the time , often referred to by scholars as the Yam , which had lavishly - furnished and well-guarded relay posts known as örtöö setup all over the Empire .
The yam system would be replicated later in the United States , in the form of the Pony Express .
A messenger would typically travel 25 miles -LRB- 40 km -RRB- from one station to the next , either receiving a fresh , rested horse , or relaying the mail to the next rider to ensure the speediest possible delivery .
The Mongol riders regularly covered 125 miles -LRB- 200 km -RRB- per day , better than the fastest record set by the Pony Express some 600 years later .
The apocryphal Acts of Paul and the apocryphal Acts of Peter suggest that Paul survived Rome and traveled further west .
Some think that Paul could have revisited Greece and Asia Minor after his trip to Spain , and might then have been arrested in Troas , and taken to Rome and executed .
4:13 -RSB- A tradition holds that Paul was interred with Saint Peter ad Catacumbas by the via Appia until moved to what is now the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome .
Bede , in his Ecclesiastical History , writes that Pope Vitalian in 665 gave Paul 's relics -LRB- including a cross made from his prison chains -RRB- from the crypts of Lucina to King Oswy of Northumbria , northern Britain .
Paul is considered the patron saint of London .
Before the so-called Jewish reclamation of Jesus -LRB- as a Jew -RRB- in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , he had hardly featured in the popular Jewish imagination and little had been written about him by the religious leaders and scholars .
But with Jesus no longer regarded as the paradigm of gentile Christianity , Paul 's position became more important in Jewish historical reconstructions of their religion 's relationship with Christianity .
Jewish philosophers -LRB- including Baruch Spinoza , Leo Shestov , and Jacob Taubes -RRB- and Jewish psychoanalysts -LRB- including Sigmund Freud and Hanns Sachs -RRB- have engaged with the apostle as one of the most influential figures in Western thought .
Elaine Pagels , professor of religion at Princeton University and an authority on Gnosticism , declined to judge -LRB- in her book The Gnostic Paul -RRB- whether Paul was actually a Gnostic .
Instead , she concentrated on how the Gnostics interpreted Paul 's letters and how evidence from gnostic sources may challenge the assumption that Paul wrote his letters to combat `` gnostic opponents '' and to repudiate their statement that they possess secret wisdom .
Paul referred to himself as being `` of the stock of Israel , of the tribe of Benjamin , a Hebrew of the Hebrews ; as touching the law , a Pharisee '' .
In 2015 , independent researchers P.J. Gott and Logan Licht reported evidence they discovered that suggests the books of the New Testament were written in `` enigmatical modes of expression , '' the method Philo the Alexandrian Jew attributes to the Essene sect of Judaism .
Josephus the Jewish historian writes , `` The Essenes also , as we call a sect of ours ... live the same kind of life as do those whom the Greeks call Pythagoreans ... '' The Greek historian Plutarch ties `` Pythagoreans '' and `` enigmatical modes of expression '' together : `` Pythagoras greatly admired the Egyptian priests , and , copying their symbolism and secret teachings , incorporated his doctrines in enigmas . ''
After testing Philo 's `` Essene '' method as reconstructed by heresy-hunters in the 17th century , they conclude that Acts ' `` Paulus also known as Saulus '' was the same `` Saulus '' Josephus blames for the events that led to the destruction of the Temple in 70 .
He also owed much to his training in the law and the prophets , utilizing this knowledge to convince his Jewish countrymen of the unity of past Old Testament prophecy and covenants with the fulfilling of these in Jesus Christ .
he now believed that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything , but that the new creation is what counts in the sight of God , -LSB- Gal .
6:15 -RSB- and that this new creation is a work of Christ in the life of believers , making them part of the church , an inclusive community of Jews and Gentiles reconciled with God through faith .
Fourteen of the twenty-seven books in the New Testament have traditionally been attributed to Paul .
Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews is not asserted in the Epistle itself and was already doubted in the 2nd and 3rd centuries .
It was almost unquestioningly accepted from the 5th to the 16th centuries that Paul was the author of Hebrews , but that view is now almost universally rejected by scholars .
The other six are believed by some scholars to have come from followers writing in his name , using material from Paul 's surviving letters and letters written by him that no longer survive .
Other scholars argue that the idea of a pseudonymous author for the disputed epistles raises many problems .
The final outcome of the incident remains uncertain .
The Catholic Encyclopedia suggests that Paul won the argument , because `` Paul 's account of the incident leaves no doubt that Peter saw the justice of the rebuke '' .
However Paul himself never mentions a victory and L. Michael White 's From Jesus to Christianity draws the opposite conclusion : `` The blowup with Peter was a total failure of political bravado , and Paul soon left Antioch as persona non grata , never again to return '' .
Some scholars see Paul -LRB- or Saul -RRB- as completely in line with 1st-century Judaism -LRB- a Pharisee and student of Gamaliel as presented by Acts -RRB- , others see him as opposed to 1st-century Judaism -LRB- notably Marcionism -RRB- , while the majority see him as somewhere in between these two extremes , opposed to `` Ritual Laws '' -LRB- for example the circumcision controversy in early Christianity -RRB- but in full agreement on `` Divine Law '' .
These views of Paul are paralleled by the views of Biblical law in Christianity .
Paul 's teaching about the end of the world is expressed most clearly in his letters to the Christians at Thessalonica .
4:16 ff -RSB- This suggests an imminent end but he is unspecific about times and seasons , and encourages his hearers to expect a delay .
Picasso 's Blue Period -LRB- 1901 -- 1904 -RRB- , characterized by sombre paintings rendered in shades of blue and blue-green , only occasionally warmed by other colours , began either in Spain in early 1901 , or in Paris in the second half of the year .
Many paintings of gaunt mothers with children date from the Blue Period , during which Picasso divided his time between Barcelona and Paris .
In his austere use of colour and sometimes doleful subject matter -- prostitutes and beggars are frequent subjects -- Picasso was influenced by a trip through Spain and by the suicide of his friend Carlos Casagemas .
Starting in autumn of 1901 he painted several posthumous portraits of Casagemas , culminating in the gloomy allegorical painting La Vie -LRB- 1903 -RRB- , now in the Cleveland Museum of Art .
In Paris , Picasso entertained a distinguished coterie of friends in the Montmartre and Montparnasse quarters , including André Breton , poet Guillaume Apollinaire , writer Alfred Jarry , and Gertrude Stein .
Apollinaire was arrested on suspicion of stealing the Mona Lisa from the Louvre in 1911 .
Apollinaire pointed to his friend Picasso , who was also brought in for questioning , but both were later exonerated .
In 1927 Picasso met 17-year-old Marie-Thérèse Walter and began a secret affair with her .
Picasso 's marriage to Khokhlova soon ended in separation rather than divorce , as French law required an even division of property in the case of divorce , and Picasso did not want Khokhlova to have half his wealth .
The two remained legally married until Khokhlova 's death in 1955 .
Picasso carried on a long-standing affair with Marie-Thérèse Walter and fathered a daughter with her , named Maya .
Marie-Thérèse lived in the vain hope that Picasso would one day marry her , and hanged herself four years after Picasso 's death .
Throughout his life Picasso maintained several mistresses in addition to his wife or primary partner .
Picasso was married twice and had four children by three women :
In 1939 -- 40 the Museum of Modern Art in New York City , under its director Alfred Barr , a Picasso enthusiast , held a major retrospective of Picasso 's principal works until that time .
This exhibition lionized the artist , brought into full public view in America the scope of his artistry , and resulted in a reinterpretation of his work by contemporary art historians and scholars .
According to Jonathan Weinberg , `` Given the extraordinary quality of the show and Picasso 's enormous prestige , generally heightened by the political impact of Guernica ... the critics were surprisingly ambivalent '' .
Picasso 's `` multiplicity of styles '' was disturbing to one journalist , another described the artist as `` wayward and even malicious '' ; Alfred Frankenstein 's review in ARTnews concluded that Picasso was both charlatan and genius .
During the Second World War , Picasso remained in Paris while the Germans occupied the city .
Picasso 's artistic style did not fit the Nazi ideal of art , so he did not exhibit during this time .
During one search of his apartment , an officer saw a photograph of the painting Guernica .
the German asked Picasso .
Around this time , Picasso took up writing as an alternative outlet .
Largely untitled except for a date and sometimes the location of where it was written -LRB- for example `` Paris 16 May 1936 '' -RRB- , these works were gustatory , erotic and at times scatological , as were his two full-length plays Desire Caught by the Tail -LRB- 1941 -RRB- and The Four Little Girls -LRB- 1949 -RRB- .
Devoting his full energies to his work , Picasso became more daring , his works more colourful and expressive , and from 1968 to 1971 he produced a torrent of paintings and hundreds of copperplate etchings .
At the time these works were dismissed by most as pornographic fantasies of an impotent old man or the slapdash works of an artist who was past his prime .
Only later , after Picasso 's death , when the rest of the art world had moved on from abstract expressionism , did the critical community come to see the late works of Picasso as prefiguring Neo-Expressionism .
Soon after hostilities began , the Republicans appointed him `` director of the Prado , albeit in absentia '' , and `` he took his duties very seriously '' , according to John Richardson , supplying the funds to evacuate the museum 's collection to Geneva .
The war provided the impetus for Picasso 's first overtly political work .
He expressed anger and condemnation of Francisco Franco and fascists in The Dream and Lie of Franco -LRB- 1937 -RRB- , which was produced `` specifically for propagandistic and fundraising purposes '' .
This surreal fusion of words and images was intended to be sold as a series of postcards to raise funds for the Spanish Republican cause .
From the beginning of his career , Picasso displayed an interest in subject matter of every kind , and demonstrated a great stylistic versatility that enabled him to work in several styles at once .
For example , his paintings of 1917 included the pointillist Woman with a Mantilla , the Cubist Figure in an Armchair , and the naturalistic Harlequin -LRB- all in the Museu Picasso , Barcelona -RRB- .
In 1919 , he made a number of drawings from postcards and photographs that reflect his interest in the stylistic conventions and static character of posed photographs .
In an interview published in 1923 , Picasso said , `` The several manners I have used in my art must not be considered as an evolution , or as steps towards an unknown ideal of painting ... If the subjects I have wanted to express have suggested different ways of expression I have never hesitated to adopt them . ''
As of 2015 , Picasso remained the top-ranked artist -LRB- based on sales of his works at auctions -RRB- according to the Art Market Trends report .
More of his paintings have been stolen than any other artist 's ; in 2012 , the Art Loss Register had 1,147 of his works listed as stolen .
The Picasso Administration functions as his official Estate .
Picasso 's father and uncle decided to send the young artist to Madrid 's Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando , the country 's foremost art school .
At age 16 , Picasso set off for the first time on his own , but he disliked formal instruction and stopped attending classes soon after enrolment .
Madrid held many other attractions .
The Prado housed paintings by Diego Velázquez , Francisco Goya , and Francisco Zurbarán .
Picasso especially admired the works of El Greco ; elements such as his elongated limbs , arresting colours , and mystical visages are echoed in Picasso 's later work .
In 1897 his realism became tinged with Symbolist influence , in a series of landscape paintings rendered in non-naturalistic violet and green tones .
What some call his Modernist period -LRB- 1899 -- 1900 -RRB- followed .
His exposure to the work of Rossetti , Steinlen , Toulouse-Lautrec and Edvard Munch , combined with his admiration for favourite old masters such as El Greco , led Picasso to a personal version of modernism in his works of this period .
The World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- has a six-stage classification that describes the process by which a novel influenza virus moves from the first few infections in humans through to a pandemic .
This starts with the virus mostly infecting animals , with a few cases where animals infect people , then moves through the stage where the virus begins to spread directly between people , and ends with a pandemic when infections from the new virus have spread worldwide and it will be out of control until we stop it .
In February 2004 , avian influenza virus was detected in birds in Vietnam , increasing fears of the emergence of new variant strains .
It is feared that if the avian influenza virus combines with a human influenza virus -LRB- in a bird or a human -RRB- , the new subtype created could be both highly contagious and highly lethal in humans .
There have been a number of significant pandemics recorded in human history , generally zoonoses which came about with domestication of animals , such as influenza and tuberculosis .
There have been a number of particularly significant epidemics that deserve mention above the `` mere '' destruction of cities :
An object 's acceleration is the net result of any and all forces acting on the object , as described by Newton 's Second Law .
Accelerations are vector quantities -LRB- they have magnitude and direction -RRB- and add according to the parallelogram law .
His meditation attempted to reason and feel in harmony with the universe .
He believed that this type of meditation brought humanity closer together and more into harmony .
People in the olden days said that there was embedded the bones of loyal subject in the calligraphy of Yan Zhenqing .
Observing the execution of brush strokes by Zhu Xi , I am indeed convinced of the truth of this opinion .
On the Amur steamer going to Sakhalin , there was a convict who had murdered his wife and wore fetters on his legs .
I noticed wherever the convict moved the little girl scrambled after him , holding on to his fetters .
At night the child slept with the convicts and soldiers all in a heap together .
Chekhov had at first written stories only for financial gain , but as his artistic ambition grew , he made formal innovations which have influenced the evolution of the modern short story .
He made no apologies for the difficulties this posed to readers , insisting that the role of an artist was to ask questions , not to answer them .
Despite Chekhov 's reputation as a playwright , William Boyd asserts that his short stories represent the greater achievement .
Raymond Carver , who wrote the short story `` Errand '' about Chekhov 's death , believed that Chekhov was the greatest of all short story writers :
One can argue Anton Chekhov is the second-most popular writer on the planet .
Only Shakespeare outranks Chekhov in terms of movie adaptations of their work , according to the movie database IMDb .
In 1876 , Chekhov 's father was declared bankrupt after overextending his finances building a new house , having been cheated by a contractor called Mironov .
To avoid debtor 's prison he fled to Moscow , where his two eldest sons , Alexander and Nikolay , were attending university .
The family lived in poverty in Moscow , Chekhov 's mother physically and emotionally broken by the experience .
Chekhov was left behind to sell the family 's possessions and finish his education .
The fixation or reduction of carbon dioxide is a process in which carbon dioxide combines with a five-carbon sugar , ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate , to yield two molecules of a three-carbon compound , glycerate 3-phosphate , also known as 3-phosphoglycerate .
Glycerate 3-phosphate , in the presence of ATP and NADPH produced during the light-dependent stages , is reduced to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate .
This product is also referred to as 3-phosphoglyceraldehyde -LRB- PGAL -RRB- or , more generically , as triose phosphate .
Most -LRB- 5 out of 6 molecules -RRB- of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate produced is used to regenerate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate so the process can continue .
The triose phosphates not thus `` recycled '' often condense to form hexose phosphates , which ultimately yield sucrose , starch and cellulose .
The sugars produced during carbon metabolism yield carbon skeletons that can be used for other metabolic reactions like the production of amino acids and lipids .
Cyanobacteria possess carboxysomes , which increase the concentration of CO2 around RuBisCO to increase the rate of photosynthesis .
An enzyme , carbonic anhydrase , located within the carboxysome releases CO2 from the dissolved hydrocarbonate ions -LRB- HCO −
Before the CO2 diffuses out it is quickly sponged up by RuBisCO , which is concentrated within the carboxysomes .
Later in 1958-1963 at Cornell University , field grown maize was reported to have much greater leaf photosynthetic rates of 40 u mol CO2/square meter.sec and was not saturated at near full sunlight .
This higher rate in maize was almost double those observed in other species such as wheat and soybean , indicating that large differences in photosynthesis exist among higher plants .
At the University of Arizona , detailed gas exchange research on more than 15 species of monocot and dicot uncovered for the first time that differences in leaf anatomy are crucial factors in differentiating photosynthetic capacities among species .
In tropical grasses , including maize , sorghum , sugarcane , Bermuda grass and in the dicot amaranthus , leaf photosynthetic rates were around 38 − 40 u mol CO2/square meter.sec. , and the leaves have two types of green cells , i. e. outer layer of mesophyll cells surrounding a tightly packed cholorophyllous vascular bundle sheath cells .
This type of anatomy was termed Kranz anatomy in the 19th century by the botanist Gottlieb Haberlandt while studying leaf anatomy of sugarcane .
Plant species with the greatest photosynthetic rates and Kranz anatomy showed no apparent photorespiration , very low CO2 compensation point , high optimum temperature , high stomatal resistances and lower mesophyll resistances for gas diffusion and rates never saturated at full sun light .
These species was later termed C4 plants as the first stable compound of CO2 fixation in light has 4 carbon as malate and aspartate .
Other species that lack Kranz anatomy were termed C3 type such as cotton and sunflower , as the first stable carbon compound is the 3-carbon PGA acid .
At constant high irradiance , the rate of carbon assimilation increases as the temperature is increased .
The 2006 third set of locks project has created larger locks , allowing bigger ships to transit through deeper and wider channels .
The allowed dimensions of ships using these locks increased by 25 % in length , 51 % in beam , and 26 % in draft , as defined by New Panamax metrics .
Passenger vessels in excess of 30,000 tons -LRB- PC/UMS -RRB- , known popularly as cruise ships , pay a rate based on the number of berths , that is , the number of passengers that can be accommodated in permanent beds .
Started in 2007 , this fee has greatly increased the tolls for such ships .
Passenger vessels of less than 30,000 tons or less than 33 tons per passenger are charged according to the same per-ton schedule as are freighters .
Almost all major cruise ships have more than 33 tons per passenger ; the rule of thumb for cruise line comfort is generally given as a minimum of 40 tons per passenger .
Increasing volumes of imports from Asia , which previously landed on U.S. West Coast ports , are now passing through the canal to the American East Coast .
The total number of ocean-going transits increased from 11,725 in 2003 to 13,233 in 2007 , falling to 12,855 in 2009 .
-LRB- The canal 's fiscal year runs from October through September . -RRB-
This has been coupled with a steady rise in average ship size and in the numbers of Panamax vessels passing through the canal , so that the total tonnage carried rose from 227.9 million PC/UMS tons in fiscal year 1999 to a then record high of 312.9 million tons in 2007 , and falling to 299.1 million tons in 2009 .
The Panama Canal Authority -LRB- ACP -RRB- has invested nearly US$ 1 billion in widening and modernizing the canal , with the aim of increasing capacity by 20 % .
The ACP cites a number of major improvements , including the widening and straightening of the Gaillard Cut to reduce restrictions on passing vessels , the deepening of the navigational channel in Gatun Lake to reduce draft restrictions and improve water supply , and the deepening of the Atlantic and Pacific entrances to the canal .
This is supported by new equipment , such as a new drill barge and suction dredger , and an increase of the tug boat fleet by 20 % .
In addition , improvements have been made to the canal 's operating machinery , including an increased and improved tug locomotive fleet , the replacement of more than 16 km -LRB- 10 mi -RRB- of locomotive track , and new lock machinery controls .
Improvements have been made to the traffic management system to allow more efficient control over ships in the canal .
On March 23 , 2016 , the expansion inauguration was set for June 26 , 2016 .
An all-water route between the oceans was still seen as the ideal solution , and in 1855 William Kennish , a Manx-born engineer working for the United States government , surveyed the isthmus and issued a report on a route for a proposed Panama Canal .
His report was published as a book entitled The Practicality and Importance of a Ship Canal to Connect the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans .
Of the many forces discussed in this paragraph , tidal force is still highly debated and defended as a possible principle driving force of plate tectonics .
The other forces are only used in global geodynamic models not using plate tectonics concepts -LRB- therefore beyond the discussions treated in this section -RRB- or proposed as minor modulations within the overall plate tectonics model .
Despite much opposition , the view of continental drift gained support and a lively debate started between `` drifters '' or `` mobilists '' -LRB- proponents of the theory -RRB- and `` fixists '' -LRB- opponents -RRB- .
During the 1920s , 1930s and 1940s , the former reached important milestones proposing that convection currents might have driven the plate movements , and that spreading may have occurred below the sea within the oceanic crust .
Concepts close to the elements now incorporated in plate tectonics were proposed by geophysicists and geologists -LRB- both fixists and mobilists -RRB- like Vening-Meinesz , Holmes , and Umbgrove .
Tectonic plates are able to move because the Earth 's lithosphere has greater mechanical strength than the underlying asthenosphere .
Plate movement is thought to be driven by a combination of the motion of the seafloor away from the spreading ridge -LRB- due to variations in topography and density of the crust , which result in differences in gravitational forces -RRB- and drag , with downward suction , at the subduction zones .
The destruction of neuronal cells produces lesions within the spinal ganglia ; these may also occur in the reticular formation , vestibular nuclei , cerebellar vermis , and deep cerebellar nuclei .
Inflammation associated with nerve cell destruction often alters the color and appearance of the gray matter in the spinal column , causing it to appear reddish and swollen .
Other destructive changes associated with paralytic disease occur in the forebrain region , specifically the hypothalamus and thalamus .
The molecular mechanisms by which poliovirus causes paralytic disease are poorly understood .
Two types of vaccine are used throughout the world to combat polio .
Both types induce immunity to polio , efficiently blocking person-to-person transmission of wild poliovirus , thereby protecting both individual vaccine recipients and the wider community -LRB- so-called herd immunity -RRB- .
Since January 2011 , there have been no reported cases of the wild polio infections in India , and in February 2012 the country was taken off the WHO list of polio endemic countries .
Since its inception , the many counter-intuitive aspects and results of quantum mechanics have provoked strong philosophical debates and many interpretations .
Even fundamental issues , such as Max Born 's basic rules concerning probability amplitudes and probability distributions , took decades to be appreciated by society and many leading scientists .
Richard Feynman once said , `` I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics . ''
According to Steven Weinberg , `` There is now in my opinion no entirely satisfactory interpretation of quantum mechanics . ''
Quantum mechanics is also critically important for understanding how individual atoms combine covalently to form molecules .
The application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is known as quantum chemistry .
Relativistic quantum mechanics can , in principle , mathematically describe most of chemistry .
Quantum mechanics can also provide quantitative insight into ionic and covalent bonding processes by explicitly showing which molecules are energetically favorable to which others and the magnitudes of the energies involved .
Furthermore , most of the calculations performed in modern computational chemistry rely on quantum mechanics .
Researchers are currently seeking robust methods of directly manipulating quantum states .
Efforts are being made to more fully develop quantum cryptography , which will theoretically allow guaranteed secure transmission of information .
In the United Kingdom , rugby union fans sometimes used the term `` rugger '' as an alternative name for the sport , -LRB- see Oxford ' - er ' -RRB- , although this archaic expression has not had currency since the 1950s or earlier .
New Zealanders refer to rugby union simply as either `` rugby '' or `` union '' , or even simply `` football '' , and to rugby league as `` rugby league '' or `` league '' .
In the U.S. , people who play rugby are sometimes called `` ruggers '' , a term little used elsewhere except facetiously .
All squamates and turtles have a three-chambered heart consisting of two atria , one variably partitioned ventricle , and two aortas that lead to the systemic circulation .
The degree of mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in the three-chambered heart varies depending on the species and physiological state .
Under different conditions , deoxygenated blood can be shunted back to the body or oxygenated blood can be shunted back to the lungs .
This variation in blood flow has been hypothesized to allow more effective thermoregulation and longer diving times for aquatic species , but has not been shown to be a fitness advantage .
As in all animals , reptilian muscle action produces heat .
In large reptiles , like leatherback turtles , the low surface-to-volume ratio allows this metabolically produced heat to keep the animals warmer than their environment even though they do not have a warm-blooded metabolism .
This form of homeothermy is called gigantothermy ; it has been suggested as having been common in large dinosaurs and other extinct large-bodied reptiles .
To date , only a few species have been studied thoroughly enough to get an idea of how turtles breathe .
The results indicate that turtles and tortoises have found a variety of solutions to this problem .
The difficulty is that most turtle shells are rigid and do not allow for the type of expansion and contraction that other amniotes use to ventilate their lungs .
Some turtles , such as the Indian flapshell -LRB- Lissemys punctata -RRB- , have a sheet of muscle that envelops the lungs .
When it contracts , the turtle can exhale .
When at rest , the turtle can retract the limbs into the body cavity and force air out of the lungs .
When the turtle protracts its limbs , the pressure inside the lungs is reduced , and the turtle can suck air in .
Turtle lungs are attached to the inside of the top of the shell -LRB- carapace -RRB- , with the bottom of the lungs attached -LRB- via connective tissue -RRB- to the rest of the viscera .
By using a series of special muscles -LRB- roughly equivalent to a diaphragm -RRB- , turtles are capable of pushing their viscera up and down , resulting in effective respiration , since many of these muscles have attachment points in conjunction with their forelimbs -LRB- indeed , many of the muscles expand into the limb pockets during contraction -RRB- .
Reptiles are generally considered less intelligent than mammals and birds .
Larger lizards , like the monitors , are known to exhibit complex behavior , including cooperation .
Crocodiles have relatively larger brains and show a fairly complex social structure .
The Komodo dragon is even known to engage in play , as are turtles , which are also considered to be social creatures and sometimes switch between monogamy and promiscuity in their sexual behavior .
One study found that wood turtles were better than white rats at learning to navigate mazes .
Geckos , skinks , and other lizards that are captured by the tail will shed part of the tail structure through a process called autotomy and thus be able to flee .
The detached tail will continue to wiggle , creating a deceptive sense of continued struggle and distracting the predator 's attention from the fleeing prey animal .
The detached tails of leopard geckos can wiggle for up to 20 minutes .
In many species the tails are of a separate and dramatically more intense color than the rest of the body so as to encourage potential predators to strike for the tail first .
In the shingleback skink and some species of geckos , the tail is short and broad and resembles the head , so that the predators may attack it rather than the more vulnerable front part .
According to a study from 2015 , Christians hold the largest amount of wealth -LRB- 55 % of the total world wealth -RRB- , followed by Muslims -LRB- 5.8 % -RRB- , Hindus -LRB- 3.3 % -RRB- and Jewish -LRB- 1.1 % -RRB- .
According to the same study it was found that adherents under the classification Irreligion or other religions hold about 34.8 % of the total global wealth .
The founders of Southern rock are usually thought to be the Allman Brothers Band , who developed a distinctive sound , largely derived from blues rock , but incorporating elements of boogie , soul , and country in the early 1970s .
The most successful act to follow them were Lynyrd Skynyrd , who helped establish the `` Good ol' boy '' image of the subgenre and the general shape of 1970s ' guitar rock .
Their successors included the fusion/progressive instrumentalists Dixie Dregs , the more country-influenced Outlaws , jazz-leaning Wet Willie and -LRB- incorporating elements of R&B and gospel -RRB- the Ozark Mountain Daredevils .
After the loss of original members of the Allmans and Lynyrd Skynyrd , the genre began to fade in popularity in the late 1970s , but was sustained the 1980s with acts like .38 Special , Molly Hatchet and the Marshall Tucker Band .
From the late 1960s it became common to divide mainstream rock music into soft and hard rock .
Soft rock was often derived from folk rock , using acoustic instruments and putting more emphasis on melody and harmonies .
Major artists included Carole King , Cat Stevens and James Taylor .
In contrast , hard rock was more often derived from blues-rock and was played louder and with more intensity .
It often emphasised the electric guitar , both as a rhythm instrument using simple repetitive riffs and as a solo lead instrument , and was more likely to be used with distortion and other effects .
Key acts included British Invasion bands like the Who and the Kinks , as well as psychedelic era performers like Cream , Jimi Hendrix and the Jeff Beck Group .
Hard rock-influenced bands that enjoyed international success in the later 1970s included Queen , Thin Lizzy , Aerosmith , AC/DC .
Rock , mostly the heavy metal genre , has been criticized by some Christian leaders , who have condemned it as immoral , anti-Christian and even demonic .
However , Christian rock began to develop in the late 1960s , particularly out of the Jesus movement beginning in Southern California , and emerged as a subgenre in the 1970s with artists like Larry Norman , usually seen as the first major `` star '' of Christian rock .
Many Christian rock performers have ties to the contemporary Christian music scene , while other bands and artists are closely linked to independent music .
Since the 1980s Christian rock performers have gained mainstream success , including figures such as the American gospel-to-pop crossover artist Amy Grant and the British singer Cliff Richard .
While these artists were largely acceptable in Christian communities the adoption of heavy rock and glam metal styles by bands like Petra and Stryper , who achieved considerable mainstream success in the 1980s , was more controversial .
From the 1990s there were increasing numbers of acts who attempted to avoid the Christian band label , preferring to be seen as groups who were also Christians , including P.O.D and Collective Soul .
Bands such as Green River , Soundgarden , the Melvins and Skin Yard pioneered the genre , with Mudhoney becoming the most successful by the end of the decade .
Grunge remained largely a local phenomenon until 1991 , when Nirvana 's album Nevermind became a huge success because of its song `` Smells Like Teen Spirit '' .
Nevermind was more melodic than its predecessors , by signing to Geffen Records the band was one of the first to employ traditional corporate promotion and marketing mechanisms such as an MTV video , in store displays and the use of radio `` consultants '' who promoted airplay at major mainstream rock stations .
During 1991 and 1992 , other grunge albums such as Pearl Jam 's Ten , Soundgarden 's Badmotorfinger and Alice in Chains ' Dirt , along with the Temple of the Dog album featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden , became among the 100 top-selling albums .
Major record labels signed most of the remaining grunge bands in Seattle , while a second influx of acts moved to the city in the hope of success .
However , with the death of Kurt Cobain and the subsequent break-up of Nirvana in 1994 , touring problems for Pearl Jam and the departure of Alice in Chains ' lead singer Layne Staley in 1996 , the genre began to decline , partly to be overshadowed by Britpop and more commercial sounding post-grunge .
Timur 's Turco-Mongolian heritage provided opportunities and challenges as he sought to rule the Mongol Empire and the Muslim world .
According to the Mongol traditions , Timur could not claim the title of khan or rule the Mongol Empire because he was not a descendant of Genghis Khan .
Therefore , Timur set up a puppet Chaghatay khan , Suyurghatmish , as the nominal ruler of Balkh as he pretended to act as a `` protector of the member of a Chinggisid line , that of Genghis Khan 's eldest son , Jochi '' .
In the end Persia was split amongst the Muzaffarids , Kartids , Eretnids , Chobanids , Injuids , Jalayirids , and Sarbadars .
In 1383 , Timur started his lengthy military conquest of Persia , though he already ruled over much of Persian Khorasan by 1381 , after Khwaja Mas ` ud , of the Sarbadar dynasty surrendered .
Timur began his Persian campaign with Herat , capital of the Kartid dynasty .
When Herat did not surrender he reduced the city to rubble and massacred most of its citizens ; it remained in ruins until Shahrukh Mirza ordered its reconstruction .
Timur sent a General to capture rebellious Kandahar .
With the capture of Herat the Kartid kingdom surrendered and became vassals of Timur , but it would later be annexed in 1389 by Timur 's son Miran Shah .
Markham , in his introduction to the narrative of Clavijo 's embassy , states that after Timur died , his body `` was embalmed with musk and rose water , wrapped in linen , laid in an ebony coffin and sent to Samarkand , where it was buried '' .
His tomb , the Gur-e Amir , still stands in Samarkand , though it has been heavily restored in recent years .
In return , Henry III of Castile sent a famous embassy to Timur 's court in Samarkand in 1403 -- 06 , led by Ruy González de Clavijo , with two other ambassadors , Alfonso Paez and Gomez de Salazar .
On their return , Timur affirmed that he regarded the king of Castile `` as his very own son '' .
He was the grandfather of the renowned Timurid sultan , astronomer and mathematician Ulugh Beg , who ruled Central Asia from 1411 to 1449 , and the great-great-great-grandfather of Babur , founder of the Mughal Empire , which ruled parts of South Asia for over three centuries , from 1526 until 1857 .
Timur is also recognized as a great patron of art and architecture , as he interacted with Muslim intellectuals such as Ibn Khaldun and Hafiz-i Abru .
When Timur captured the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid at Ankara , he was often praised and seen as a trusted ally by European rulers such as Charles VI of France and Henry IV of England because they believed he was saving Christianity from the Turkish Empire in the Middle East .
Those two kings also praised him because his victory at Ankara allowed Christian merchants to remain in the Middle East and allowed for their safe return home to both France and England .
Timur was also praised because it was believed that he helped restore the right of passage for Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land .
Wagner began composing the music for Das Rheingold between November 1853 and September 1854 , following it immediately with Die Walküre -LRB- written between June 1854 and March 1856 -RRB- .
He decided to put the work aside to concentrate on a new idea : Tristan und Isolde , based on the Arthurian love story Tristan and Iseult .
Cosima was 24 years younger than Wagner and was herself illegitimate , the daughter of the Countess Marie d'Agoult , who had left her husband for Franz Liszt .
Liszt initially disapproved of his daughter 's involvement with Wagner , though nevertheless the two men were friends .
The indiscreet affair scandalised Munich , and Wagner also fell into disfavour with many leading members of the court , who were suspicious of his influence on the King .
In December 1865 , Ludwig was finally forced to ask the composer to leave Munich .
He apparently also toyed with the idea of abdicating to follow his hero into exile , but Wagner quickly dissuaded him .
Ludwig installed Wagner at the Villa Tribschen , beside Switzerland 's Lake Lucerne .
Die Meistersinger was completed at Tribschen in 1867 , and premiered in Munich on 21 June the following year .
At Ludwig 's insistence , `` special previews '' of the first two works of the Ring , Das Rheingold and Die Walküre , were performed at Munich in 1869 and 1870 , but Wagner retained his dream , first expressed in `` A Communication to My Friends '' , to present the first complete cycle at a special festival with a new , dedicated , opera house .
In 1871 , Wagner decided to move to Bayreuth , which was to be the location of his new opera house .
The town council donated a large plot of land -- the `` Green Hill '' -- as a site for the theatre .
The Wagners moved to the town the following year , and the foundation stone for the Bayreuth Festspielhaus -LRB- `` Festival Theatre '' -RRB- was laid .
Wagner initially announced the first Bayreuth Festival , at which for the first time the Ring cycle would be presented complete , for 1873 , but since Ludwig had declined to finance the project , the start of building was delayed and the proposed date for the festival was deferred .
To raise funds for the construction , `` Wagner societies '' were formed in several cities , and Wagner began touring Germany conducting concerts .
By the spring of 1873 , only a third of the required funds had been raised ; further pleas to Ludwig were initially ignored , but early in 1874 , with the project on the verge of collapse , the King relented and provided a loan .
The full building programme included the family home , `` Wahnfried '' , into which Wagner , with Cosima and the children , moved from their temporary accommodation on 18 April 1874 .
The theatre was completed in 1875 , and the festival scheduled for the following year .
Commenting on the struggle to finish the building , Wagner remarked to Cosima : `` Each stone is red with my blood and yours '' .
Wagner wrote a number of articles in his later years , often on political topics , and often reactionary in tone , repudiating some of his earlier , more liberal , views .
These include `` Religion and Art '' -LRB- 1880 -RRB- and `` Heroism and Christianity '' -LRB- 1881 -RRB- , which were printed in the journal Bayreuther Blätter , published by his supporter Hans von Wolzogen .
Wagner 's sudden interest in Christianity at this period , which infuses Parsifal , was contemporary with his increasing alignment with German nationalism , and required on his part , and the part of his associates , `` the rewriting of some recent Wagnerian history '' , so as to represent , for example , the Ring as a work reflecting Christian ideals .
-LRB- 1878 , but based on a draft written in the 1860s -RRB- , repeated Wagner 's antisemitic preoccupations .
Abandoned works include a pastoral opera based on Goethe 's Die Laune des Verliebten -LRB- The Infatuated Lover 's Caprice -RRB- , written at the age of 17 , Die Hochzeit -LRB- The Wedding -RRB- , on which Wagner worked in 1832 , and the singspiel Männerlist größer als Frauenlist -LRB- Men are More Cunning than Women , 1837 -- 38 -RRB- .
Die Feen -LRB- The Fairies , 1833 -RRB- was unperformed in the composer 's lifetime and Das Liebesverbot -LRB- The Ban on Love , 1836 -RRB- was withdrawn after its first performance .
The compositional style of these early works was conventional -- the relatively more sophisticated Rienzi showing the clear influence of Grand Opera à la Spontini and Meyerbeer -- and did not exhibit the innovations that would mark Wagner 's place in musical history .
Later in life , Wagner said that he did not consider these works to be part of his oeuvre ; none of them has ever been performed at the Bayreuth Festival , and they have been performed only rarely in the last hundred years -LRB- although the overture to Rienzi is an occasional concert piece -RRB- .
Die Feen , Das Liebesverbot and Rienzi were performed at both Leipzig and Bayreuth in 2013 to mark the composer 's bicentenary .
Wagner 's middle stage output began with Der fliegende Holländer -LRB- The Flying Dutchman , 1843 -RRB- , followed by Tannhäuser -LRB- 1845 -RRB- and Lohengrin -LRB- 1850 -RRB- .
These three operas are sometimes referred to as Wagner 's `` romantic operas '' .
They reinforced the reputation , among the public in Germany and beyond , that Wagner had begun to establish with Rienzi .
Although distancing himself from the style of these operas from 1849 onwards , he nevertheless reworked both Der fliegende Holländer and Tannhäuser on several occasions .
These three operas are considered to represent a significant developmental stage in Wagner 's musical and operatic maturity as regards thematic handling , portrayal of emotions and orchestration .
They are the earliest works included in the Bayreuth canon , the mature operas that Cosima staged at the Bayreuth Festival after Wagner 's death in accordance with his wishes .
All three -LRB- including the differing versions of Der fliegende Holländer and Tannhäuser -RRB- continue to be regularly performed throughout the world , and have been frequently recorded .
They were also the operas by which his fame spread during his lifetime .
Édouard Dujardin , whose influential novel Les Lauriers sont coupés is in the form of an interior monologue inspired by Wagnerian music , founded a journal dedicated to Wagner , La Revue Wagnérienne , to which J. K. Huysmans and Téodor de Wyzewa contributed .
In a list of major cultural figures influenced by Wagner , Bryan Magee includes D. H. Lawrence , Aubrey Beardsley , Romain Rolland , Gérard de Nerval , Pierre-Auguste Renoir , Rainer Maria Rilke and numerous others .
In the 20th century , W. H. Auden once called Wagner `` perhaps the greatest genius that ever lived '' , while Thomas Mann and Marcel Proust were heavily influenced by him and discussed Wagner in their novels .
He is also discussed in some of the works of James Joyce .
Wagnerian themes inhabit T. S. Eliot 's The Waste Land , which contains lines from Tristan und Isolde and Götterdämmerung and Verlaine 's poem on Parsifal .
The villa by contrast was an escape from the bustle of the city , and in literature represents a lifestyle that balances the civilized pursuit of intellectual and artistic interests -LRB- otium -RRB- with an appreciation of nature and the agricultural cycle .
Ideally a villa commanded a view or vista , carefully framed by the architectural design .
It might be located on a working estate , or in a `` resort town '' situated on the seacoast , such as Pompeii and Herculaneum .
The empire in the East -- often known as the Byzantine Empire , but referred to in its time as the Roman Empire or by various other names -- had a different fate .
During the 6th century , Justinian I reconquered Northern Africa and Italy .
But within a few years of Justinian 's death , Byzantine possessions in Italy were greatly reduced by the Lombards who settled in the peninsula .
In the east , partially resulting from the destructive Plague of Justinian , the Romans were threatened by the rise of Islam , whose followers rapidly conquered the territories of Syria , Armenia and Egypt during the Byzantine-Arab Wars , and soon presented a direct threat to Constantinople .
In the following century , the Arabs also captured southern Italy and Sicily .
Slavic populations were also able to penetrate deep into the Balkans .
Opus sectile is a related technique in which flat stone , usually coloured marble , is cut precisely into shapes from which geometric or figurative patterns are formed .
This more difficult technique was highly prized , and became especially popular for luxury surfaces in the 4th century , an abundant example of which is the Basilica of Junius Bassus .
The hydraulic pipe organ -LRB- hydraulis -RRB- was `` one of the most significant technical and musical achievements of antiquity '' , and accompanied gladiator games and events in the amphitheatre , as well as stage performances .
It was among the instruments that the emperor Nero played .
Romans who received an elite education studied Greek as a literary language , and most men of the governing classes could speak Greek .
The Julio-Claudian emperors encouraged high standards of correct Latin -LRB- Latinitas -RRB- , a linguistic movement identified in modern terms as Classical Latin , and favoured Latin for conducting official business .
Claudius tried to limit the use of Greek , and on occasion revoked the citizenship of those who lacked Latin , but even in the Senate he drew on his own bilingualism in communicating with Greek-speaking ambassadors .
In the Eastern empire , laws and official documents were regularly translated into Greek from Latin .
The everyday interpenetration of the two languages is indicated by bilingual inscriptions , which sometimes even switch back and forth between Greek and Latin .
After all freeborn inhabitants of the empire were universally enfranchised in 212 AD , a great number of Roman citizens would have lacked Latin , though they were expected to acquire at least a token knowledge , and Latin remained a marker of `` Romanness . ''
Among other reforms , the emperor Diocletian -LRB- reigned 284 -- 305 -RRB- sought to renew the authority of Latin , and the Greek expression hē kratousa dialektos attests to the continuing status of Latin as `` the language of power . ''
In the early 6th century , the emperor Justinian engaged in a quixotic effort to reassert the status of Latin as the language of law , even though in his time Latin no longer held any currency as a living language in the East .
A period of increasing trouble and decline began with the reign of Commodus .
Commodus ' assassination in 192 triggered the Year of the Five Emperors , of which Septimius Severus emerged victorious .
The Sack of Rome in 410 by the Visigoths and again in 455 by the Vandals accelerated the Western Empire 's decay , while the deposition of the emperor , Romulus Augustulus , in 476 by Odoacer , is generally accepted to mark the end of the empire in the west .
However , Augustulus was never recognized by his Eastern colleague , and separate rule in the Western part of the empire only ceased to exist upon the death of Julius Nepos , in 480 .
The Eastern Roman Empire endured for another millennium , eventually falling to the Ottoman Turks in 1453 .
The assassination of Alexander Severus in 235 led to the Crisis of the Third Century in which 26 men were declared emperor by the Roman Senate over a fifty-year time span .
It was not until the reign of Diocletian that the empire was fully stabilized with the introduction of the Tetrarchy , which saw four emperors rule the empire at once .
This arrangement was ultimately unsuccessful , leading to a civil war that was finally ended by Constantine I , who defeated his rivals and became the sole ruler of the empire .
Constantine subsequently shifted the capital to Byzantium , which was renamed `` Constantinople '' in his honour .
Constantine also adopted Christianity which later became the official state religion of the empire .
This eastern part of the empire -LRB- modernly called `` Byzantine Empire '' -RRB- remained one of the leading powers in the world alongside its arch-rival the Sassanid Empire , which had inherited a centuries-old Roman-Persian conflict from its predecessor the Parthians .
Following the death of Theodosius I , the last emperor to rule a united Roman Empire , the dominion of the empire was gradually eroded by abuses of power , civil wars , barbarian migrations and invasions , military reforms and economic depression .
As part of the Augustan programme to restore traditional morality and social order , moral legislation attempted to regulate the conduct of men and women as a means of promoting `` family values '' .
Adultery , which had been a private family matter under the Republic , was criminalized , and defined broadly as an illicit sex act -LRB- stuprum -RRB- that occurred between a male citizen and a married woman , or between a married woman and any man other than her husband .
Childbearing was encouraged by the state : a woman who had given birth to three children was granted symbolic honours and greater legal freedom -LRB- the ius trium liberorum -RRB- .
In the time of Nero , senators were still primarily from Rome and other parts of Italy , with some from the Iberian peninsula and southern France ; men from the Greek-speaking provinces of the East began to be added under Vespasian .
The first senator from the most eastern province , Cappadocia , was admitted under Marcus Aurelius .
During the 3rd century , domicile at Rome became impractical , and inscriptions attest to senators who were active in politics and munificence in their homeland -LRB- patria -RRB- .
The early Empire was monetized to a near-universal extent , in the sense of using money as a way to express prices and debts .
The sestertius -LRB- plural sestertii , English `` sesterces '' , symbolized as HS -RRB- was the basic unit of reckoning value into the 4th century , though the silver denarius , worth four sesterces , was used also for accounting beginning in the Severan dynasty .
Bullion and ingots seem not to have counted as pecunia , `` money , '' and were used only on the frontiers for transacting business or buying property .
Romans in the 1st and 2nd centuries counted coins , rather than weighing them -- an indication that the coin was valued on its face , not for its metal content .
This tendency towards fiat money led eventually to the debasement of Roman coinage , with consequences in the later Empire .
The standardization of money throughout the Empire promoted trade and market integration .
The high amount of metal coinage in circulation increased the money supply for trading or saving .
Early 1968 was when the first bona fide reggae records were released : `` Nanny Goat '' by Larry Marshall and `` No More Heartaches '' by The Beltones .
That same year , the newest Jamaican sound began to spawn big-name imitators in other countries .
American artist Johnny Nash 's 1968 hit `` Hold Me Tight '' has been credited with first putting reggae in the American listener charts .
Around the same time , reggae influences were starting to surface in rock and pop music , one example being 1968 's `` Ob-La-Di , Ob-La-Da '' by The Beatles .
Some dancehall and ragga artists have been criticised for homophobia , including threats of violence .
Other notable dancehall artists who have been accused of homophobia include Elephant Man , Bounty Killer and Beenie Man .
The controversy surrounding anti-gay lyrics has led to the cancellation of UK tours by Beenie Man and Sizzla .
Toronto , Canada has also seen the cancellation of concerts due to artists such as Elephant Man and Sizzla refusing to conform to similar censorship pressures .
After lobbying from the Stop Murder Music coalition , the dancehall music industry agreed in 2005 to stop releasing songs that promote hatred and violence against gay people .
In June 2007 , Beenie Man , Sizzla and Capleton signed up to the Reggae Compassionate Act , in a deal brokered with top dancehall promoters and Stop Murder Music activists .
They renounced homophobia and agreed to `` not make statements or perform songs that incite hatred or violence against anyone from any community '' .
Five artists targeted by the anti-homophobia campaign did not sign up to the act , including Elephant Man , TOK , Bounty Killa and Vybz Kartel .
Buju Banton and Beenie Man both gained positive press coverage around the world for publicly renouncing homophobia by signing the Reggae Compassion Act .
However , both of these artists have since denied any involvement in anti-homophobia work and both deny having signed any such act .
In architecture , Filippo Brunelleschi was foremost in studying the remains of ancient classical buildings .
With rediscovered knowledge from the 1st-century writer Vitruvius and the flourishing discipline of mathematics , Brunelleschi formulated the Renaissance style that emulated and improved on classical forms .
Another building demonstrating this style is the church of St. Andrew in Mantua , built by Alberti .
The outstanding architectural work of the High Renaissance was the rebuilding of St. Peter 's Basilica , combining the skills of Bramante , Michelangelo , Raphael , Sangallo and Maderno .
In architecture , the huge profits of the spice trade financed a sumptuous composite style in the first decades of the 16th century , the Manueline , incorporating maritime elements .
In music , Pedro de Escobar and Duarte Lobo produced four songbooks , including the Cancioneiro de Elvas .
Bernardim Ribeiro developed pastoral romance , plays by Gil Vicente fused it with popular culture , reporting the changing times , and Luís de Camões inscribed the Portuguese feats overseas in the epic poem Os Lusíadas .
Travel literature especially flourished : João de Barros , Castanheda , António Galvão , Gaspar Correia , Duarte Barbosa , and Fernão Mendes Pinto , among others , described new lands and were translated and spread with the new printing press .
After joining the Portuguese exploration of Brazil in 1500 , Amerigo Vespucci coined the term New World , in his letters to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de ' Medici .
The Icelandic Commonwealth was established in 930 AD by refugees from Norway who had fled the unification of that country under King Harald Fairhair .
The Commonwealth consisted of a number of clans run by chieftains , and the Althing was a combination of parliament and supreme court where disputes appealed from lower courts were settled , laws were decided , and decisions of national importance were taken .
One such example was the Christianisation of Iceland in 1000 , where the Althing decreed , in order to prevent an invasion , that all Icelanders must be baptized , and forbade celebration of pagan rituals .
In 1641 the English Civil War began .
Spearheaded by the Puritans and funded by the merchants of London , the revolt was a success , and King Charles I was executed .
In England James Harrington , Algernon Sidney , and John Milton became some of the first writers to argue for rejecting monarchy and embracing a republican form of government .
The Dutch Republic continued in name until 1795 , but by the mid-18th century the stadtholder had become a de facto monarch .
In the wake of the First World War , the Russian monarchy fell during the Russian Revolution .
The Russian Provisional Government was established in its place on the lines of a liberal republic , but this was overthrown by the Bolsheviks who went on to establish the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics .
This was the first republic established under Marxist-Leninist ideology .
Communism was wholly opposed to monarchy , and became an important element of many republican movements during the 20th century .
The Russian Revolution spread into Mongolia , and overthrew its theocratic monarchy in 1924 .
In the aftermath of the Second World War the communists gradually gained control of Romania , Bulgaria , Yugoslavia , Hungary and Albania , ensuring that the states were reestablished as socialist republics rather than monarchies .
If the head of state of a republic is also the head of government , this is called a presidential system .
There are also elective monarchies where ultimate power is vested in a monarch , but the monarch is chosen by some manner of election .
A current example of such a state is Malaysia where the Yang di-Pertuan Agong is elected every five years by the Conference of Rulers composed of the nine hereditary rulers of the Malay states , and the Vatican City-State , where the pope is selected by cardinal-electors , currently all cardinals under a specific age .
The Holy Roman Empire is an important example , where each new emperor was chosen by a group of electors .
Islamic states also rarely employed primogeniture , instead relying on various forms of election to choose a monarch 's successor .
This process has been studied extensively in social psychology as implicit associations and implicit attitudes , a component of implicit cognition .
Implicit attitudes are evaluations that occur without conscious awareness towards an attitude object or the self .
Implicit attitudes are not consciously identified -LRB- or are inaccurately identified -RRB- traces of past experience that mediate favorable or unfavorable feeling , thought , or action toward social objects .
Often , the two are listed together as `` racial and ethnic '' in describing some action or outcome that is associated with prejudice within a majority or dominant group in society .
Further , the meaning of the term racism is often conflated with the terms prejudice , bigotry , and discrimination .
Racism is a complex concept that can involve each of those , but can not be equated to nor is it synonymous with these other terms .
... any distinction , exclusion , restriction or preference based on race , color , descent , or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition , enjoyment or exercise , on an equal footing , of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political , economic , social , cultural or any other field of public life .
Racism existed during the 19th century as `` scientific racism '' , which attempted to provide a racial classification of humanity .
In 1775 Johann Blumenbach divided the world 's population into five groups according to skin color -LRB- Caucasians , Mongols , etc. -RRB- , positing that the non-caucasians had arisen through a process of degeneration .
Another early view in scientific racism was the polygenist view , which held that the different races had been separately created .
Polygenist Christoph Meiners for example , split mankind into two divisions which he labeled the `` beautiful White race '' and the `` ugly Black race '' .
In Meiners 's book , The Outline of History of Mankind , Meiners claimed that a main characteristic of race is either beauty or ugliness .
He viewed only the white race as beautiful .
The Nazis considered most Slavs to be Non-Aryan Untermenschen .
Slavic nations such as the Ukrainians , Czechs , Slovaks , Bulgarians and Croats who collaborated with Nazi Germany were perceived as ethnically superior to other Slavs , mostly due to pseudoscientific theories about these nations having a considerable admixture of Germanic blood .
In the secret plan Generalplan Ost -LRB- `` Master Plan East '' -RRB- the Nazis resolved to expel , enslave , or exterminate most Slavic people to provide `` living space '' for Germans , however Nazi policy towards Slavs changed during World War II due to manpower shortages which necessitated limited Slavic participation in the Waffen-SS .
Significant war crimes were committed against Slavs , particularly Poles , and Soviet POWs had a far higher mortality rate than their American and British counterparts due to deliberate neglect and mistreatment .
Serious race riots in Durban between Indians and Zulus erupted in 1949 .
Ne Win 's rise to power in Burma in 1962 and his relentless persecution of `` resident aliens '' led to an exodus of some 300,000 Burmese Indians .
The Zanzibar Revolution of January 12 , 1964 put an end to the local Arab dynasty .
Thousands of Arabs and Indians in Zanzibar were massacred in riots , and thousands more were detained or fled the island .
On 4 August 1972 , Idi Amin , President of Uganda , ethnically cleansed Uganda 's Asians giving them 90 days to leave the country .
Some 70,000 black African Mauritanians were expelled from Mauritania in the late 1980s .
The Darfur conflict has been described by some as a racial matter .
In October 2006 , Niger announced that it would deport the Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger to Chad .
This population numbered about 150,000 .
While the Government collected Arabs in preparation for the deportation , two girls died , reportedly after fleeing Government forces , and three women suffered miscarriages .
One form of racism in the United States was enforced racial segregation which existed until the 1960s when it was outlawed in the Civil Rights Act of 1964 .
It has been argued that this separation of races continues to exist de facto today .
The causes of segregation vary from lack of access to loans and resources to discrimination in realty .
Beyond a Boundary -LRB- 1963 -RRB- , written by Trinidadian C.L.R. James , is often named the best book on any sport , ever written .
In the visual arts , notable cricket paintings include Albert Chevallier Tayler 's Kent vs Lancashire at Canterbury -LRB- 1907 -RRB- and Russell Drysdale 's The Cricketers -LRB- 1948 -RRB- , which has been called `` possibly the most famous Australian painting of the 20th century . ''
French impressionist Camille Pissarro painted cricket on a visit to England in the 1890s .
Francis Bacon , an avid cricket fan , captured a batsman in motion .
Caribbean artist Wendy Nanan 's cricket images are featured in a limited edition first day cover for Royal Mail 's `` World of Invention '' stamp issue , celebrating the London Cricket Conference 1 -- 3 March 2007 , first international workshop of its kind and part of the celebrations leading up to the 2007 Cricket World Cup .
At any instant each batsman `` owns '' a particular wicket -LRB- usually the one closer to him -RRB- and , except when actually batting , is safe when he is in his ground .
This means that at least one part of his body or bat is touching the ground behind the popping crease .
If his wicket is put down while the ball is live and he is out of his ground then he is dismissed , but the other batsman is safe .
The batsman tries to prevent the ball from hitting the wicket by striking the ball with his bat .
-LRB- This includes the handle of the bat , and his gloves . -RRB-
If the bowler succeeds in putting down the wicket the batsman is dismissed and is said to be bowled out .
If the batsman misses the ball , but any part of his body prevents it from reaching the wicket , then he is out leg before wicket , or `` LBW '' .
The match ends when all innings have been completed .
The umpires can also call an end to the match in case of bad light or weather .
But often the match ends immediately when one team to bat has completed its innings or both its innings , and the other team already has more runs .
In four-innings games the last team may not even need to play its second innings : this team is said to win by an innings .
If the winning team has not completed its last innings , and still has , for example , five batsmen who are not out or have not even batted , then they are said to `` win by five wickets '' .
If the last team to bat is all out and loses the match because it has say 50 fewer runs than the other team , then the winning team `` wins by 50 runs '' .
In the rare event that the two teams both complete their innings and they have the same number of runs , then it is a tie .
The bowler reaches his delivery stride by means of a `` run-up '' , although some bowlers with a very slow delivery take no more than a couple of steps before bowling .
A fast bowler needs momentum and takes quite a long run-up , running very fast as he does so .
In all forms of cricket , if a fielder is injured or becomes ill during a match , a substitute is allowed to field instead of him .
The substitute can not bowl , act as a captain or keep wicket .
The substitute leaves the field when the injured player is fit to return .
Batsmen come in to bat in a batting order , decided by the team captain usually after consulting the team coach , though the captain is not bound to consult the coach .
The first two batsmen -- the `` openers '' -- usually face the hostile bowling from fresh fast bowlers with a new ball .
The top batting positions are usually given to the most competent batsmen in the team , and the team 's bowlers -- who are typically , but not always , less skilled as batsmen -- typically bat last .
Most axial resistors use a pattern of colored stripes to indicate resistance , which also indicate tolerance , and may also be extended to show temperature coefficient and reliability class .
Cases are usually tan , brown , blue , or green , though other colors are occasionally found such as dark red or dark gray .
The power rating is not usually marked and is deduced from the size .
The rapid industrialization of Russia also resulted in urban overcrowding and poor conditions for urban industrial workers -LRB- as mentioned above -RRB- .
Between 1890 and 1910 , the population of the capital , Saint Petersburg , swelled from 1,033,600 to 1,905,600 , with Moscow experiencing similar growth .
This created a new ` proletariat ' which , due to being crowded together in the cities , was much more likely to protest and go on strike than the peasantry had been in previous times .
In one 1904 survey , it was found that an average of sixteen people shared each apartment in Saint Petersburg , with six people per room .
The poor conditions only aggravated the situation , with the number of strikes and incidents of public disorder rapidly increasing in the years shortly before World War I. Because of late industrialization , Russia 's workers were highly concentrated .
By 1914 40 % of Russian workers were employed in factories of +1,000 workers -LRB- 32 % in 1901 -RRB- .
42 % worked in 100 -- 1,000 worker enterprises , 18 % in 1 -- 100 worker businesses -LRB- in the USA , 1914 , the figures were 18 , 47 and 35 respectively -RRB- .
With a firm belief that his power to rule was granted by Divine Right , Nicholas assumed that the Russian people were devoted to him with unquestioning loyalty .
This ironclad belief rendered Nicholas unwilling to allow the progressive reforms that might have alleviated the suffering of the Russian people .
Even after the 1905 revolution spurred the Tsar to decree limited civil rights and democratic representation , he worked to limit even these liberties in order to preserve the ultimate authority of the crown .
On 16 March -LSB- O.S. 3 March -RSB- , a provisional government was announced .
The center-left was well represented , and the government was initially chaired by a liberal aristocrat , Prince Georgy Yevgenievich Lvov , a member of the Constitutional Democratic party -LRB- KD -RRB- .
The socialists had formed their rival body , the Petrograd Soviet -LRB- or workers ' council -RRB- four days earlier .
The Petrograd Soviet and the Provisional Government competed for power over Russia .
The relationship between these two major powers was complex from the beginning and would shape the politics of 1917 .
The representatives of the Provisional Government agreed to `` take into account the opinions of the Soviet of Workers ' Deputies '' , though they were also determined to prevent `` interference in the actions of the government '' , which would create `` an unacceptable situation of dual power . ''
In fact , this was precisely what was being created , though this `` dual power '' -LRB- dvoevlastie -RRB- was the result less of the actions or attitudes of the leaders of these two institutions than of actions outside their control , especially the ongoing social movement taking place on the streets of Russia 's cities , in factories and shops , in barracks and in the trenches , and in the villages .
Lenin 's biographer Robert Service , says he , `` laid the foundations of dictatorship and lawlessness .
Lenin had consolidated the principle of state penetration of the whole society , its economy and its culture .
Lenin had practised terror and advocated revolutionary amoralism . ''
The Liberals were now better placed to voice their complaints , since they were participating more fully through a variety of voluntary organizations .
In July 1915 , a Central War Industries Committee was established under the chairmanship of a prominent Octobrist , Guchkov , and including ten workers ' representatives .
The Petrograd Mensheviks agreed to join despite the objections of their leaders abroad .
All this activity gave renewed encouragement to political ambitions , and , in September 1915 , a combination of Octobrists and Kadets in the Duma demanded the forming of a responsible government .
The Tsar rejected these proposals .
Sport -LRB- UK -RRB- or sports -LRB- US -RRB- are all usually forms of competitive physical activity or games which , through casual or organized participation , aim to use , maintain or improve physical ability and skills while providing enjoyment to participants , and in some cases , entertainment for spectators .
Usually the contest or game is between two sides , each attempting to exceed the other .
Some sports allow a tie game ; others provide tie-breaking methods , to ensure one winner and one loser .
A number of such two-sided contests may be arranged in a tournament producing a champion .
Many sports leagues make an annual champion by arranging games in a regular sports season , followed in some cases by playoffs .
In certain sports such as racing , many contestants may compete , each against each other , with one winner .
Both amateur and professional sports attract spectators , both in person at the sport venue , and through broadcast mediums including radio , television and internet broadcast .
Both attendance in person and viewing remotely can incur a sometimes substantial charge , such as an entrance ticket , or pay-per-view television broadcast .
Do not imagine that there is any bird more easily caught by decoy , nor any fish sooner fixed on the hook by wormy bait , than are all these poor fools neatly tricked into servitude by the slightest feather passed , so to speak , before their mouths .
By these practices and enticements the ancient dictators so successfully lulled their subjects under the yoke , that the stupefied peoples , fascinated by the pastimes and vain pleasures flashed before their eyes , learned subservience as naïvely , but not so creditably , as little children learn to read by looking at bright picture books .
In 1928 , one of the first humanoid robots , Eric , was exhibited at the annual exhibition of the Model Engineers Society in London , where it delivered a speech .
Invented by W. H. Richards , the robot 's frame consisted of an aluminium body of armour with eleven electromagnets and one motor powered by a twelve-volt power source .
The robot could move its hands and head and could be controlled through remote control or voice control .
Both Eric and his `` brother '' George toured the world .
Various techniques have emerged to develop the science of robotics and robots .
One method is evolutionary robotics , in which a number of differing robots are submitted to tests .
Those which perform best are used as a model to create a subsequent `` generation '' of robots .
Another method is developmental robotics , which tracks changes and development within a single robot in the areas of problem-solving and other functions .
Another new type of robot is just recently introduced which acts both as a smartphone and robot and is named RoboHon .
Mobile robots are usually used in tightly controlled environments such as on assembly lines because they have difficulty responding to unexpected interference .
Because of this most humans rarely encounter robots .
Robots can also be found in military applications .
Kevin J. Delaney said `` Robots are taking human jobs .
But Bill Gates believes that governments should tax companies ' use of them , as a way to at least temporarily slow the spread of automation and to fund other types of employment . ''
The robot tax would also help pay a guaranteed living wage to the displaced workers .
McKesson 's Robot RX is another healthcare robotics product that helps pharmacies dispense thousands of medications daily with little or no errors .
The robot can be ten feet wide and thirty feet long and can hold hundreds of different kinds of medications and thousands of doses .
The pharmacy saves many resources like staff members that are otherwise unavailable in a resource scarce industry .
It uses an electromechanical head coupled with a pneumatic system to capture each dose and deliver it to its either stocked or dispensed location .
The head moves along a single axis while it rotates 180 degrees to pull the medications .
During this process it uses barcode technology to verify its pulling the correct drug .
Once the bin is filled with all of the drugs that a particular patient needs and that the robot stocks , the bin is then released and returned out on the conveyor belt to a technician waiting to load it into a cart for delivery to the floor .
Robots appear in many films .
Malnutrition or malnourishment is a condition that results from eating a diet in which nutrients are either not enough or are too much such that the diet causes health problems .
Not enough nutrients is called undernutrition or undernourishment while too much is called overnutrition .
Malnutrition is often used to specifically refer to undernutrition where an individual is not getting enough calories , protein , or micronutrients .
Extreme undernourishment , known as starvation , may have symptoms that include : a short height , thin body , very poor energy levels , and swollen legs and abdomen .
People also often get infections and are frequently cold .
The symptoms of micronutrient deficiencies depend on the micronutrient that is lacking .
John Conrad Waterlow established a new classification for malnutrition .
Instead of using just weight for age measurements , the classification established by Waterlow combines weight-for-height -LRB- indicating acute episodes of malnutrition -RRB- with height-for-age to show the stunting that results from chronic malnutrition .
Protein-calorie malnutrition can cause cognitive impairments .
For humans , `` critical period varies from the final third of gestation to the first 2 years of life '' .
Iron deficiency anemia in children under two years of age likely affects brain function acutely and probably also chronically .
Folate deficiency has been linked to neural tube defects .
Major causes of malnutrition include poverty and food prices , dietary practices and agricultural productivity , with many individual cases being a mixture of several factors .
Various scales of analysis also have to be considered in order to determine the sociopolitical causes of malnutrition .
For example , the population of a community may be at risk if the area lacks health-related services , but on a smaller scale certain households or individuals may be at even higher risk due to differences in income levels , access to land , or levels of education .
It is argued that commodity speculators are increasing the cost of food .
As the real estate bubble in the United States was collapsing , it is said that trillions of dollars moved to invest in food and primary commodities , causing the 2007 -- 2008 food price crisis .
Rates of malnutrition tend to increase with age with less than 10 percent of the `` young '' elderly -LRB- up to age 75 -RRB- malnourished , while 30 to 65 percent of the elderly in home care , long-term care facilities , or acute hospitals are malnourished .
Many elderly people require assistance in eating , which may contribute to malnutrition .
Because of this , one of the main requirements of elderly care is to provide an adequate diet and all essential nutrients .
Most artificial plasmas are generated by the application of electric and/or magnetic fields through a gas .
Plasma generated in a laboratory setting and for industrial use can be generally categorized by :
Although these particles are unbound , they are not ` free ' in the sense of not experiencing forces .
Moving charged particles generates an electric current within a magnetic field ; and any movement of a charged plasma particle affects and is affected by the general field created by the motion of other charges .
In turn this governs collective behavior with many degrees of variation .
Horse racing events are held Thursday nights and weekend afternoons at the Jockey Club .
Hang gliding in Rio de Janeiro started in the mid-1970s and quickly proved to be well-suited for this town , because of its geography : steep mountains encounter the Atlantic Ocean , which provide excellent take-off locations and great landing zones on the beach .
Jacarepaguá-Roberto Marinho Airport : used by general aviation and home to the Aeroclube do Brasil -LRB- Brasil Flying club -RRB- .
The three lines serve the city seven days a week .
The first line runs from General Osório in Ipanema to Uruguai Station in Tijuca .
The second line runs from Botafogo , sharing ten stations with the first line , terminating at Pavuna in northern Rio .
The third connects General Osório to Jardim Oceânico Station , in the Barra da Tijuca neighborhood , where the 2016 Olympics Games were held .
The Metro runs services from 05:00 am to 12:00 midnight , Monday to Saturday , and from 07:00 am to 11:00 pm Sundays and public holidays .
People can buy tickets for the Metro at train stations and can either buy single tickets or rechargeable cards .
People can also buy tickets for the Metro at buses that make connect places far from the Metro .
Integration with buses are possible in several forms , an integrated Metro and bus ticket for a single journey is available for some lines paying an additional fee and is known as an Integração Expressa -LRB- Express Integration -RRB- and Expresso Barra , the other possibility is taking the Metro na Superfície -LRB- Surface Metro -RRB- with no additional fee .
Elsewhere in the state , drought is very rare , albeit bound to happen occasionally given its strongly seasonal tropical climate .
The Brazilian drought of 2014 -- 2015 , most severe in the Southeast Region and the worst in decades , affected the entire metropolitan region 's water supply -LRB- a diversion from the Paraíba do Sul River to the Guandu River is a major source for the state 's most populous mesoregion -RRB- .
Plans to divert the Paraíba do Sul to the Sistema Cantareira -LRB- Cantareira system -RRB- during its water crisis of 2014 , in order to help the critically drought-stricken Greater São Paulo area , offered the easiest short-term response to the consequences of climate change and the deforestation of the Amazon rainforest -LRB- itself affecting climate change -RRB- , an issue expected to linger across the entire country in the near future .
This will likely make the situation even more complex , however , as sufficient rainfall to supply tap water service to both metropolitan areas in the future is merely speculative .
This circumstance , as shown in a recent central government report , is worsened by the fact that 37 % of the country 's tap water is being lost because of leaky pipes -LRB- sometimes resulting in contaminated water -RRB- , fraud and illegal access , and by the country 's use of hydroelectric power as its main energy source .
One of the most famous hills in the city is the 842-metre-high -LRB- 2,762-foot -RRB- Pedra da Gávea -LRB- Crow 's nest Rock -RRB- bordering the South Zone .
On the top of its summit is a huge rock formation -LRB- some , such as Erich von Däniken in his 1973 book , In Search of Ancient Gods , claim it to be a sculpture -RRB- resembling a sphinx-like , bearded head that is visible for many kilometres around .
Rio de Janeiro became an attractive place for companies to locate when it was the capital of Brazil , as important sectors of society and of the government were present in the city .
The city was chosen as headquarters for state-owned companies such as Petrobras , Eletrobras , Caixa Econômica Federal and Vale -LRB- which was privatized in the 1990s -RRB- .
After the transfer of the capital to Brasília , in 1960 , it kept attracting more companies , especially after the discovery of oil in the Campos Basin , which produces most of the total oil production of Brazil .
This made many oil and gas companies to be based in Rio de Janeiro , such as the Brazilian branches of Shell , EBX and Esso .
Fire ants , Solenopsis spp. , are unique in having a venom sac containing piperidine alkaloids .
Many animals can learn behaviours by imitation , but ants may be the only group apart from mammals where interactive teaching has been observed .
A knowledgeable forager of Temnothorax albipennis will lead a naive nest-mate to newly discovered food by the process of tandem running .
The follower obtains knowledge through its leading tutor .
The leader is acutely sensitive to the progress of the follower and slows down when the follower lags and speeds up when the follower gets too close .
Ant societies have division of labour , communication between individuals , and an ability to solve complex problems .
Many human cultures make use of ants in cuisine , medication , and rituals .
Some species are valued in their role as biological pest control agents .
Their ability to exploit resources may bring ants into conflict with humans , however , as they can damage crops and invade buildings .
Some species , such as the red imported fire ant -LRB- Solenopsis invicta -RRB- , are regarded as invasive species , establishing themselves in areas where they have been introduced accidentally .
A nematode -LRB- Myrmeconema neotropicum -RRB- that infects canopy ants -LRB- Cephalotes atratus -RRB- causes the black-coloured gasters of workers to turn red .
The parasite also alters the behaviour of the ant , causing them to carry their gasters high .
The conspicuous red gasters are mistaken by birds for ripe fruits , such as Hyeronima alchorneoides , and eaten .
The droppings of the bird are collected by other ants and fed to their young , leading to further spread of the nematode .
Ants became dominant after adaptive radiation at the beginning of the Paleogene period .
By the Oligocene and Miocene , ants had come to represent 20 -- 40 % of all insects found in major fossil deposits .
Of the species that lived in the Eocene epoch , around one in 10 genera survive to the present .
Genera surviving today comprise 56 % of the genera in Baltic amber fossils -LRB- early Oligocene -RRB- , and 92 % of the genera in Dominican amber fossils -LRB- apparently early Miocene -RRB- .
Some ant species are considered as pests , primarily those that occur in human habitations , where their presence is often problematic .
Some species or genera commonly categorized as pests include the Argentine ant , pavement ant , yellow crazy ant , banded sugar ant , Pharaoh ant , carpenter ants , odorous house ant , red imported fire ant , and European fire ant .
Some ants will raid stored food , others may damage indoor structures , some can damage agricultural crops directly -LRB- or by aiding sucking pests -RRB- , and some will sting or bite .
The adaptive nature of ant colonies make it nearly impossible to eliminate entire colonies and most pest management practices aim to control local populations and tend to be temporary solutions .
Ant populations are managed by a combination of approaches that make use of chemical , biological and physical methods .
Chemical methods include the use of insecticidal bait which is gathered by ants as food and brought back to the nest where the poison is inadvertently spread to other colony members through trophallaxis .
Management is based on the species and techniques can vary according to the location and circumstance .
The aurochs originally ranged throughout Europe , North Africa , and much of Asia .
In historical times , its range became restricted to Europe , and the last known individual died in Masovia , Poland , in about 1627 .
Breeders have attempted to recreate cattle of similar appearance to aurochs by crossing traditional types of domesticated cattle , creating the Heck cattle breed .
Cattle are very gregarious and even short-term isolation is considered to cause severe psychological stress .
When Aubrac and Fresian heifers are isolated , they increase their vocalizations and experience increased heart rate and plasma cortisol concentrations .
When visual contact is re-instated , vocalisations rapidly decline , regardless of the familiarity of the returning cattle , however , heart rate decreases are greater if the returning cattle are familiar to the previously-isolated individual .
Mirrors have been used to reduce stress in isolated cattle .
Cattle have a range of odiferous glands over their body including interdigital , infraorbital , inguinal and sebaceous glands , indicating that olfaction probably plays a large role in their social life .
Both the primary olfactory system using the olfactory bulbs , and the secondary olfactory system using the vomeronasal organ are used .
This latter olfactory system is used in the flehmen response .
There is evidence that when cattle are stressed , this can be recognised by other cattle and this is communicated by alarm substances in the urine .
The odour of dog faeces induces behavioural changes prior to cattle feeding , whereas the odours of urine from either stressed or non-stressed conspecifics and blood have no effect .
The word `` cow '' came via Anglo-Saxon cū -LRB- plural cȳ -RRB- , from Common Indo-European gʷōus -LRB- genitive gʷowés -RRB- = `` a bovine animal '' , compare Persian gâv , Sanskrit go - , Welsh buwch .
The plural cȳ became ki or kie in Middle English , and an additional plural ending was often added , giving kine , kien , but also kies , kuin and others .
In older English sources such as the King James Version of the Bible , `` cattle '' refers to livestock , as opposed to `` deer '' which refers to wildlife .
`` Wild cattle '' may refer to feral cattle or to undomesticated species of the genus Bos .
Today , when used without any other qualifier , the modern meaning of `` cattle '' is usually restricted to domesticated bovines .
Some microbes in the cattle gut carry out anaerobic process known as methanogenesis , which produces methane .
Cattle and other livestock emit about 80 to 93 Tg of methane per year , accounting for an estimated 37 % of anthropogenic methane emissions , and additional methane is produced by anaerobic fermentation of manure in manure lagoons and other manure storage structures .
The 100-year global warming potential of methane , including effects on ozone and stratospheric water vapor , is 25 times as great as that of carbon dioxide .
Methane 's effect on global warming is correlated with changes in atmospheric methane content , not with emissions .
Mitigation options for reducing methane emission from ruminant enteric fermentation include genetic selection , immunization , rumen defaunation , diet modification and grazing management , among others .
While cattle fed forage actually produce more methane than grain-fed cattle , the increase may be offset by the increased carbon recapture of pastures , which recapture three times the CO2 of cropland used for grain .
Cortisol is an important stress hormone ; its plasma concentrations increase greatly when subjected to high levels of stress .
Increased concentration levels of cortisol have been associated with significant increases in gonadotrophin levels and lowered progestin levels .
Reduction of stress is important in the reproductive state of cows as an increase in gonadotrophin and lowered progesterone levels may impinge on the ovulatory and lutenization process and to reduce the chances of successful implantation .
A high cortisol level will also stimulate the degradation of fats and proteins which may make it difficult for the animal to sustain its pregnancy if implanted successfully .
Fillers improve performance and/or reduce production costs .
Stabilizing additives include fire retardants to lower the flammability of the material .
Many plastics contain fillers , relatively inert and inexpensive materials that make the product cheaper by weight .
Biodegradable plastics break down -LRB- degrade -RRB- upon exposure to sunlight -LRB- e.g. , ultra-violet radiation -RRB- , water or dampness , bacteria , enzymes , wind abrasion , and in some instances , rodent , pest , or insect attack are also included as forms of biodegradation or environmental degradation .
Some modes of degradation require that the plastic be exposed at the surface , whereas other modes will only be effective if certain conditions exist in landfill or composting systems .
Starch powder has been mixed with plastic as a filler to allow it to degrade more easily , but it still does not lead to complete breakdown of the plastic .
Some researchers have actually genetically engineered bacteria that synthesize a completely biodegradable plastic , but this material , such as Biopol , is expensive at present .
Companies have made biodegradable additives to enhance the biodegradation of plastics .
Plastic products contain a variety of additives , some of which can be toxic .
For example , plasticizers like adipates and phthalates are often added to brittle plastics like polyvinyl chloride to make them pliable enough for use in food packaging , toys , and many other items .
Traces of these compounds can leach out of the product .
Owing to concerns over the effects of such leachates , the European Union has restricted the use of DEHP -LRB- di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate -RRB- and other phthalates in some applications , and the United States has limited the use of DEHP , DPB , BBP , DINP , DIDP , and DnOP in children 's toys and child care articles with the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act .
Some compounds leaching from polystyrene food containers have been proposed to interfere with hormone functions and are suspected human carcinogens .
Some polymers may also decompose into the monomers or other toxic substances when heated .
In 2011 , it was reported that `` almost all plastic products '' sampled released chemicals with estrogenic activity , although the researchers identified plastics which did not leach chemicals with estrogenic activity .
Production of plastics from crude oil requires 62 to 108 MJ/Kg -LRB- taking into account the average efficiency of US utility stations of 35 % -RRB- .
This is much higher than the energy needed to produce many other materials , e.g. iron -LRB- from iron ore -RRB- requires 20-25 MJ/Kg of energy , glass -LRB- from sand , etc. -RRB- 18-35 MJ/Kg , steel -LRB- from iron -RRB- 20-50 MJ/Kg , paper -LRB- from timber -RRB- 25-50 MJ/Kg .
Her name is changed to Qiuling -LRB- 秋菱 -RRB- by Xue Pan 's spoiled wife , Xia Jingui -LRB- 夏金桂 -RRB- who is jealous of her and tries to poison her .
Xue Pan makes her the lady of the house after Jingui 's death .
Mitosis occurs in somatic cells , while meiosis occurs in gametes .
Sexual reproduction is a biological process that creates a new organism by combining the genetic material of two organisms in a process that starts with meiosis , a specialized type of cell division .
Each of two parent organisms contributes half of the offspring 's genetic makeup by creating haploid gametes .
It is believed that `` the masking of deleterious alleles favors the evolution of a dominant diploid phase in organisms that alternate between haploid and diploid phases '' where recombination occurs freely .
Most organisms form two different types of gametes .
In these anisogamous species , the two sexes are referred to as male -LRB- producing sperm or microspores -RRB- and female -LRB- producing ova or megaspores -RRB- .
In isogamous species , the gametes are similar or identical in form -LRB- isogametes -RRB- , but may have separable properties and then may be given other different names -LRB- see isogamy -RRB- .
A few types of organisms , such as many fungi and the ciliate Paramecium aurelia , have more than two `` sexes '' , called syngens .
Most animals -LRB- including humans -RRB- and plants reproduce sexually .
Sexually reproducing organisms have different sets of genes for every trait -LRB- called alleles -RRB- .
Offspring inherit one allele for each trait from each parent .
Being in a gentleman 's library Euclid 's Elements lay open , and 't was the forty-seventh proposition * in the first book .
This made him in love with geometry . ''
That line divides the square on the hypotenuse into two rectangles , each having the same area as one of the two squares on the legs .
The converse can also be proven without assuming the Pythagorean theorem .
That Pythagoras originated this very simple proof is sometimes inferred from the writings of the later Greek philosopher and mathematician Proclus .
Several other proofs of this theorem are described below , but this is known as the Pythagorean one .
The Pythagorean theorem can be generalized to inner product spaces , which are generalizations of the familiar 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional Euclidean spaces .
For example , a function may be considered as a vector with infinitely many components in an inner product space , as in functional analysis .
Another generalization of the Pythagorean theorem , introduced by Donald R. Conant and William A. Beyer , applies to a wide range of objects and sets of objects in any number of dimensions .
Kubrick was among the first directors to use video assist during filming .
At the time he began using it in 1966 , it was considered cutting-edge technology , requiring him to build his own system .
On some films , such as Barry Lyndon , he used custom made zoom lenses , which allowed him to start a scene with a close-up and slowly zoom out to capture the full panorama of scenery and to film long takes under changing outdoor lighting conditions by making aperture adjustments while the cameras rolled .
LoBrutto notes that Kubrick 's technical knowledge about lenses `` dazzled the manufacturer 's engineers , who found him to be unprecedented among contemporary filmmakers '' .
For Barry Lyndon he also used a specially adapted high-speed -LRB- f/0 .7 -RRB- Zeiss camera lens , originally developed for NASA , to shoot numerous scenes lit only with candlelight .
Actor Steven Berkoff recalls that Kubrick wanted scenes to be shot using `` pure candlelight '' , and in doing so Kubrick `` made a unique contribution to the art of filmmaking going back to painting ... You almost posed like for portraits . ''
LoBrutto notes that cinematographers all over the world wanted to know about Kubrick 's `` magic lens '' and that he became a `` legend '' among cameramen around the world .
Kubrick 's attention to music was an aspect of what many referred to as his `` perfectionism '' and extreme attention to minute details , which his wife Christiane attributed to an addiction to music .
In his last six films , Kubrick usually chose music from existing sources , especially classical compositions .
He also felt that building scenes from great music often created the `` most memorable scenes '' in the best films .
During that period , he listened to what LoBrutto describes as `` every available recording of seventeenth-and eighteenth - century music , acquiring thousands of records to find Handel 's sarabande used to score the scene '' .
Jack Nicholson likewise observed his attention to music for his films , stating that Kubrick `` listened constantly to music until he discovered something he felt was right or that excited him '' .
Soon after his sister 's birth , Kubrick began schooling in Public School 3 in the Bronx , and moved to Public School 90 in June 1938 .
Although his IQ was discovered to be above average , his attendance was poor , and he missed 56 days in his first term alone , as many as he attended .
The two indulged in numerous photographic projects for which they roamed the streets for interesting subjects to capture , and spent time in local cinemas studying films .
As a teenager , Kubrick was also interested in jazz , and briefly attempted a career as a drummer .
He spent most Saturdays during the summer watching the New York Yankees , and would later photograph two boys watching the game in an assignment for Look magazine to emulate his own childhood excitement with baseball .
When Kubrick was 12 , his father Jack taught him chess .
The game remained a lifelong interest of Kubrick 's , appearing in many scenes of his films .
Kubrick himself , who later became a member of the United States Chess Federation , explained that chess helped him develop `` patience and discipline '' in making decisions .
At the age of 13 , Kubrick 's father bought him a Graflex camera , triggering a fascination with still photography .
He became friends with a neighbor , Marvin Traub , who shared his passion for photography .
Traub had his own darkroom , where the young Kubrick and he would spend many hours perusing photographs and watching the chemicals `` magically make images on photographic paper '' .
In 1965 the Kubricks bought Abbots Mead on Barnet Lane , just south of the Elstree/Borehamwood studio complex in England .
Kubrick worked almost exclusively from this home for 14 years where , with some exceptions , he researched , invented special effects techniques , designed ultra-low light lenses for specially modified cameras , pre-produced , edited , post-produced , advertised , distributed and carefully managed all aspects of four of his films .
In 1978 , Kubrick moved into Childwickbury Manor in Hertfordshire , a mainly 18th century stately home , which was once owned by a wealthy racehorse owner , about 30 mi -LRB- 50 km -RRB- north of London and a 10-minute drive from his previous home at Abbotts Mead .
His new home became a workplace for Kubrick and his wife , `` a perfect family factory '' as Christiane called it , and Kubrick converted the stables into extra production rooms besides ones within the home that he used for editing and storage .
A workaholic , Kubrick rarely took a vacation or left England during the forty years before he died .
Biographer Vincent LoBrutto notes that Kubrick 's confined way of living and desire for privacy has led to spurious stories about his reclusiveness , similar to those of Greta Garbo , Howard Hughes , and J. D. Salinger .
Michael Herr , Kubrick 's co-screenwriter on Full Metal Jacket , who knew him well , considers his `` reclusiveness '' to be myth : '' -LSB- H -RSB- e was in fact a complete failure as a recluse , unless you believe that a recluse is simply someone who seldom leaves his house .
Stanley saw a lot of people ... he was one of the most gregarious men I ever knew , and it did n't change anything that most of this conviviality went on over the phone . ''
Lo Brutto states that one of the reasons he acquired a reputation as a recluse was because he insisted in remaining near his home , but the reason for this was because for Kubrick there were only three places on the planet he could make high quality films with the necessary technical expertise and equipment : Los Angeles , New York or around London .
Between two estimators of a given parameter , the one with lower mean squared error is said to be more efficient .
Furthermore , an estimator is said to be unbiased if its expected value is equal to the true value of the unknown parameter being estimated , and asymptotically unbiased if its expected value converges at the limit to the true value of such parameter .
Mean squared error is used for obtaining efficient estimators , a widely used class of estimators .
Misuse of statistics can produce subtle , but serious errors in description and interpretation -- subtle in the sense that even experienced professionals make such errors , and serious in the sense that they can lead to devastating decision errors .
For instance , social policy , medical practice , and the reliability of structures like bridges all rely on the proper use of statistics .
A standard statistical procedure involves the test of the relationship between two statistical data sets , or a data set and a synthetic data drawn from idealized model .
A hypothesis is proposed for the statistical relationship between the two data sets , and this is compared as an alternative to an idealized null hypothesis of no relationship between two data sets .
Rejecting or disproving the null hypothesis is done using statistical tests that quantify the sense in which the null can be proven false , given the data that are used in the test .
Working from a null hypothesis , two basic forms of error are recognized : Type I errors -LRB- null hypothesis is falsely rejected giving a `` false positive '' -RRB- and Type II errors -LRB- null hypothesis fails to be rejected and an actual difference between populations is missed giving a `` false negative '' -RRB- .
Multiple problems have come to be associated with this framework : ranging from obtaining a sufficient sample size to specifying an adequate null hypothesis .
State policy has influenced the funding of public works and science for thousands of years , dating at least from the time of the Mohists , who inspired the study of logic during the period of the Hundred Schools of Thought , and the study of defensive fortifications during the Warring States period in China .
In Great Britain , governmental approval of the Royal Society in the 17th century recognized a scientific community which exists to this day .
The professionalization of science , begun in the 19th century , was partly enabled by the creation of scientific organizations such as the National Academy of Sciences , the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute , and state funding of universities of their respective nations .
Public policy can directly affect the funding of capital equipment and intellectual infrastructure for industrial research by providing tax incentives to those organizations that fund research .
Paul Feyerabend advanced the idea of epistemological anarchism , which holds that there are no useful and exception-free methodological rules governing the progress of science or the growth of knowledge and that the idea that science can or should operate according to universal and fixed rules are unrealistic , pernicious and detrimental to science itself .
Feyerabend advocates treating science as an ideology alongside others such as religion , magic , and mythology , and considers the dominance of science in society authoritarian and unjustified .
He also contended -LRB- along with Imre Lakatos -RRB- that the demarcation problem of distinguishing science from pseudoscience on objective grounds is not possible and thus fatal to the notion of science running according to fixed , universal rules .
Feyerabend also stated that science does not have evidence for its philosophical precepts , particularly the notion of uniformity of law and process across time and space .
Finally , another approach often cited in debates of scientific skepticism against controversial movements like `` creation science '' is methodological naturalism .
That the restriction is merely methodological -LRB- rather than ontological -RRB- means that science should not consider supernatural explanations itself , but should not claim them to be wrong either .
Instead , supernatural explanations should be left a matter of personal belief outside the scope of science .
Methodological naturalism maintains that proper science requires strict adherence to empirical study and independent verification as a process for properly developing and evaluating explanations for observable phenomena .
The absence of these standards , arguments from authority , biased observational studies and other common fallacies are frequently cited by supporters of methodological naturalism as characteristic of the non-science they criticize .
Stanovich also asserts that science avoids searching for a `` magic bullet '' ; it avoids the single-cause fallacy .
This means a scientist would not ask merely `` What is the cause of ... '' , but rather `` What are the most significant causes of ... '' .
Of course , research often analyzes few factors at once , but these are always added to the long list of factors that are most important to consider .
Before the invention or discovery of the concept of `` nature '' -LRB- ancient Greek phusis -RRB- by the Pre-Socratic philosophers , the same words tend to be used to describe the natural `` way '' in which a plant grows , and the `` way '' in which , for example , one tribe worships a particular god .
For this reason , it is claimed these men were the first philosophers in the strict sense , and also the first people to clearly distinguish `` nature '' and `` convention . ''
Science was therefore distinguished as the knowledge of nature and things which are true for every community , and the name of the specialized pursuit of such knowledge was philosophy -- the realm of the first philosopher-physicists .
In contrast , trying to use knowledge of nature to imitate nature -LRB- artifice or technology , Greek technē -RRB- was seen by classical scientists as a more appropriate interest for lower class artisans .
A clear-cut distinction between formal -LRB- eon -RRB- and empirical science -LRB- doxa -RRB- was made by the pre-Socratic philosopher Parmenides -LRB- fl .
Although his work Peri Physeos -LRB- On Nature -RRB- is a poem , it may be viewed as an epistemological essay on method in natural science .
Parmenides ' ἐὸν may refer to a formal system or calculus which can describe nature more precisely than natural languages .
In October 1885 , Freud went to Paris on a fellowship to study with Jean-Martin Charcot , a renowned neurologist who was conducting scientific research into hypnosis .
Charcot specialized in the study of hysteria and susceptibility to hypnosis , which he frequently demonstrated with patients on stage in front of an audience .
Freud founded this discussion group at the suggestion of the physician Wilhelm Stekel .
Stekel had studied medicine at the University of Vienna under Richard von Krafft-Ebing .
His conversion to psychoanalysis is variously attributed to his successful treatment by Freud for a sexual problem or as a result of his reading The Interpretation of Dreams , to which he subsequently gave a positive review in the Viennese daily newspaper Neues Wiener Tagblatt .
Psychoanalytic societies and institutes were established in Switzerland -LRB- 1919 -RRB- , France -LRB- 1926 -RRB- , Italy -LRB- 1932 -RRB- , the Netherlands -LRB- 1933 -RRB- , Norway -LRB- 1933 -RRB- and in Jerusalem -LRB- 1933 -RRB- by Eitingon , who had fled Berlin after Adolf Hitler came to power .
The New York Psychoanalytic Institute was founded in 1931 .
Freud believed that the human psyche is subject to two conflicting drives : the life drive or libido and the death drive .
The life drive was also termed `` Eros '' and the death drive `` Thanatos '' , although Freud did not use the latter term ; `` Thanatos '' was introduced in this context by Paul Federn .
Freud hypothesized that libido is a form of mental energy with which processes , structures and object-representations are invested .
Arthur Janov 's primal therapy , which has been an influential post-Freudian psychotherapy , resembles psychoanalytic therapy in its emphasis on early childhood experience , but has also differences with it .
While Janov 's theory is akin to Freud 's early idea of Actualneurosis , he does not have a dynamic psychology but a nature psychology like that of Reich or Perls , in which need is primary while wish is derivative and dispensable when need is met .
Despite its surface similarity to Freud 's ideas , Janov 's theory lacks a strictly psychological account of the unconscious and belief in infantile sexuality .
Janov writes in The Primal Scream -LRB- 1970 -RRB- that primal therapy has in some ways returned to Freud 's early ideas and techniques .
Ellen Bass and Laura Davis , co-authors of The Courage to Heal -LRB- 1988 -RRB- , are described as `` champions of survivorship '' by Frederick Crews , who considers Freud the key influence upon them , although in his view they are indebted not to classic psychoanalysis but to `` the pre-psychoanalytic Freud ... who supposedly took pity on his hysterical patients , found that they were all harboring memories of early abuse ... and cured them by unknotting their repression . ''
Crews sees Freud as having anticipated the recovered memory movement by emphasizing `` mechanical cause-and-effect relations between symptomatology and the premature stimulation of one body zone or another '' , and with pioneering its `` technique of thematically matching a patient 's symptom with a sexually symmetrical ` memory . ' ''
Crews believes that Freud 's confidence in accurate recall of early memories anticipates the theories of recovered memory therapists such as Lenore Terr , which in his view have led to people being wrongfully imprisoned or involved in litigation .
Other viewpoints include those of Hans Eysenck , who writes in Decline and Fall of the Freudian Empire -LRB- 1985 -RRB- that Freud set back the study of psychology and psychiatry `` by something like fifty years or more '' , and Malcolm Macmillan , who concludes in Freud Evaluated -LRB- 1991 -RRB- that `` Freud 's method is not capable of yielding objective data about mental processes '' .
Morris Eagle states that it has been `` demonstrated quite conclusively that because of the epistemologically contaminated status of clinical data derived from the clinical situation , such data have questionable probative value in the testing of psychoanalytic hypotheses '' .
Richard Webster , in Why Freud Was Wrong -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , called psychoanalysis perhaps the most complex and successful pseudoscience in history .
Crews believes that psychoanalysis has no scientific or therapeutic merit .
In a study of psychoanalysis in the United States , Nathan Hale reported on the `` decline of psychoanalysis in psychiatry '' during the years 1965 -- 1985 .
The continuation of this trend was noted by Alan Stone : `` As academic psychology becomes more ` scientific ' and psychiatry more biological , psychoanalysis is being brushed aside . ''
Paul Stepansky , while noting that psychoanalysis remains influential in the humanities , records the `` vanishingly small number of psychiatric residents who choose to pursue psychoanalytic training '' and the `` nonanalytic backgrounds of psychiatric chairpersons at major universities '' among the evidence he cites for his conclusion that `` Such historical trends attest to the marginalisation of psychoanalysis within American psychiatry . ''
Nonetheless Freud was ranked as the third most cited psychologist of the 20th century , according to a Review of General Psychology survey of American psychologists and psychology texts , published in 2002 .
It is also claimed that in moving beyond the `` orthodoxy of the not so distant past ... new ideas and new research has led to an intense reawakening of interest in psychoanalysis from neighbouring disciplines ranging from the humanities to neuroscience and including the non-analytic therapies '' .
An 11-year sunspot cycle is half of a 22-year Babcock -- Leighton dynamo cycle , which corresponds to an oscillatory exchange of energy between toroidal and poloidal solar magnetic fields .
At solar-cycle maximum , the external poloidal dipolar magnetic field is near its dynamo-cycle minimum strength , but an internal toroidal quadrupolar field , generated through differential rotation within the tachocline , is near its maximum strength .
At this point in the dynamo cycle , buoyant upwelling within the convective zone forces emergence of toroidal magnetic field through the photosphere , giving rise to pairs of sunspots , roughly aligned east -- west and having footprints with opposite magnetic polarities .
The magnetic polarity of sunspot pairs alternates every solar cycle , a phenomenon known as the Hale cycle .
In 1666 , Isaac Newton observed the Sun 's light using a prism , and showed that it is made up of light of many colors .
In 1800 , William Herschel discovered infrared radiation beyond the red part of the solar spectrum .
The 19th century saw advancement in spectroscopic studies of the Sun ; Joseph von Fraunhofer recorded more than 600 absorption lines in the spectrum , the strongest of which are still often referred to as Fraunhofer lines .
Lord Kelvin suggested that the Sun is a gradually cooling liquid body that is radiating an internal store of heat .
Kelvin and Hermann von Helmholtz then proposed a gravitational contraction mechanism to explain the energy output , but the resulting age estimate was only 20 million years , well short of the time span of at least 300 million years suggested by some geological discoveries of that time .
In 1890 Joseph Lockyer , who discovered helium in the solar spectrum , proposed a meteoritic hypothesis for the formation and evolution of the Sun .
During sunrise and sunset , sunlight is attenuated because of Rayleigh scattering and Mie scattering from a particularly long passage through Earth 's atmosphere , and the Sun is sometimes faint enough to be viewed comfortably with the naked eye or safely with optics -LRB- provided there is no risk of bright sunlight suddenly appearing through a break between clouds -RRB- .
Hazy conditions , atmospheric dust , and high humidity contribute to this atmospheric attenuation .
On the basis of the findings of this study , the 10th CGPM in 1954 decided that an international system should be derived from six base units to provide for the measurement of temperature and optical radiation in addition to mechanical and electromagnetic quantities .
In 1960 , the 11th CGPM named the system the International System of Units , abbreviated SI from the French name , Le Système International d'Unités .
The BIPM has also described SI as `` the modern metric system '' .
The seventh base unit , the mole , was added in 1971 by the 14th CGPM .
The SI base units are the building blocks of the system and all other units are derived from them .
When Maxwell first introduced the concept of a coherent system , he identified three quantities that could be used as base units : mass , length and time .
Giorgi later identified the need for an electrical base unit .
Theoretically any one of electric current , potential difference , electrical resistance , electrical charge or a number of other quantities could have provided the base unit , with the remaining units then being defined by the laws of physics .
In the event , the unit of electric current was chosen for SI .
Another three base units -LRB- for temperature , substance and luminous intensity -RRB- were added later .
Likewise , the plural forms of units follow the grammar of the language concerned : in English , the normal rules of English grammar are used , e.g. `` henries '' is the plural of `` henry '' .
For example , in Polish the plural form depends on the actual quantity : 0 metrów , 1 metr , 2 metry , 3 metry , 4 metry , 5 metrów , 6 metrów , 7 metrów , 8 metrów , etc. .
The first letter of symbols for units derived from the name of a person is written in upper case ; otherwise , they are written in lower case .
E.g. , the unit of pressure is named after Blaise Pascal , so its symbol is written `` Pa '' , but the symbol for mole is written `` mol '' .
Since 1979 , the litre may exceptionally be written using either an uppercase `` L '' or a lowercase `` l '' , a decision prompted by the similarity of the lowercase letter `` l '' to the numeral `` 1 '' , especially with certain typefaces or English-style handwriting .
The American NIST recommends that within the United States `` L '' be used rather than `` l '' .
Metrologists carefully distinguish between the definition of a unit and its realisation .
The definition of each base unit of the SI is drawn up so that it is unique and provides a sound theoretical basis on which the most accurate and reproducible measurements can be made .
The realisation of the definition of a unit is the procedure by which the definition may be used to establish the value and associated uncertainty of a quantity of the same kind as the unit .
A description of the mise en pratique of the base units is given in an electronic appendix to the SI Brochure .
The first such group comprises the units of time and of angles and certain legacy non-SI metric units .
Most of mankind has used the day and its subdivisions as a basis of time with the result that the second , minute , hour and day , unlike the foot or the pound , were the same regardless of where it was being measured .
The tonne , litre and hectare were adopted by the CGPM in 1879 and have been retained as units that may be used alongside SI units , having been given unique symbols .
The redefinitions are expected to be adopted at the 26th CGPM in the fall of 2018 .
The CODATA task group on fundamental constants has announced special submission deadlines for data to compute the values that will be announced at this event .
At the highest points of the Andean region , climates are colder than the ones occurring at the highest point of the Norwegian fjords .
In the Andean plateaus , the warm climate prevails , although it is tempered by the altitude , while in the coastal strip , there is an equatorial climate of the Guinean type .
From this point until the north of the Chilean coast appear , successively , Mediterranean oceanic climate , temperate of the Breton type and , already in Tierra del Fuego , cold climate of the Siberian type .
The Spaniards were committed to convert their native subjects to Christianity and were quick to purge any native cultural practices that hindered this end ; however , many initial attempts at this were only partially successful , as native groups simply blended Catholicism with their established beliefs and practices .
Furthermore , the Spaniards brought their language to the degree they did with their religion , although the Roman Catholic Church 's evangelization in Quechua , Aymara , and Guaraní actually contributed to the continuous use of these native languages albeit only in the oral form .
Most of the population lives near the continent 's western or eastern coasts while the interior and the far south are sparsely populated .
The geography of western South America is dominated by the Andes mountains ; in contrast , the eastern part contains both highland regions and large lowlands where rivers such as the Amazon , Orinoco , and Paraná flow .
Most of the continent lies in the tropics .
In the new century , as wars became less violent and less frequent .
Brazil entered into a small conflict with a Bolivia for the possession of the Acre , which was acquired by Brazil in 1902 .
In 1917 Brazil declared war on the Central Powers and join the allied side in the World War I , sending a small fleet to the Mediterranean Sea and some troops to integrate the British and French troops .
It was the only South American country to fought this war .
Later in 1932 Colombia and Peru entered a short armed conflict for possession in the Amazon .
In the same year Paraguay declared war on Bolivia for the possession of the Chaco , in a conflict that had three years later with a victory of Paraguay .
Between 1941 and 1942 Peru and Ecuador fought decisively for territories claimed by both that were annexed by Peru , removing from Ecuador its frontier with Brazil .
Revolutionary movements and right-wing military dictatorships became common after World War II , but since the 1980s , a wave of democratization came through the continent , and democratic rule is widespread now .
Nonetheless , allegations of corruption are still very common , and several countries have developed crises which have forced the resignation of their governments , although , in most occasions , regular civilian succession has continued .
In the interwar period , nationalism grown stronger in the continent influenced by countries like Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy .
A series of authoritarian rules broke out in South American countries with views bringing the closer to the axis power , like Quasi-Fascist Brazil of Getúlio Vargas or the Perón 's Argentina .
In the late 20th century , during the Cold War , many countries became military dictatorships in attempts avoid communism .
After the fall of the communism , these countries became democratic republics .
The example below shows the amount of time required for a star of 20 M ☉ to consume all of its nuclear fuel .
The Italian astronomer Geminiano Montanari recorded observing variations in luminosity of the star Algol in 1667 .
Edmond Halley published the first measurements of the proper motion of a pair of nearby `` fixed '' stars , demonstrating that they had changed positions since the time of the ancient Greek astronomers Ptolemy and Hipparchus .
The concept of a constellation was known to exist during the Babylonian period .
Ancient sky watchers imagined that prominent arrangements of stars formed patterns , and they associated these with particular aspects of nature or their myths .
Twelve of these formations lay along the band of the ecliptic and these became the basis of astrology .
The formation of a star begins with gravitational instability within a molecular cloud , caused by regions of higher density - often triggered by compression of clouds by radiation from massive stars , expanding bubbles in the interstellar medium , the collision of different molecular clouds , or the collision of galaxies -LRB- as in a starburst galaxy -RRB- .
When a region reaches a sufficient density of matter to satisfy the criteria for Jeans instability , it begins to collapse under its own gravitational force .
The blown-off outer layers of dying stars include heavy elements , which may be recycled during the formation of new stars .
These heavy elements allow the formation of rocky planets .
The outflow from supernovae and the stellar wind of large stars play an important part in shaping the interstellar medium .
The earliest known star catalogues were compiled by the ancient Babylonian astronomers of Mesopotamia in the late 2nd millennium BC , during the Kassite Period -LRB- ca. 1531 -- 1155 BC -RRB- .
One of the most massive stars known is Eta Carinae , which , with 100 -- 150 times as much mass as the Sun , will have a lifespan of only several million years .
Several stars in the R136 cluster in the Large Magellanic Cloud have been measured with larger masses , but it has been determined that they could have been created through the collision and merger of massive stars in close binary systems , sidestepping the 150 M ☉ limit on massive star formation .
The apparent brightness of a star is expressed in terms of its apparent magnitude .
It is a function of the star 's luminosity , its distance from Earth , and the altering of the star 's light as it passes through Earth 's atmosphere .
Stars are given a single-letter classification according to their spectra , ranging from type O , which are very hot , to M , which are so cool that molecules may form in their atmospheres .
A variety of rare spectral types are given special classifications .
Each letter has 10 sub-divisions , numbered from 0 to 9 , in order of decreasing temperature .
However , this system breaks down at extreme high temperatures as classes O0 and O1 may not exist .
During their stellar evolution , some stars pass through phases where they can become pulsating variables .
Pulsating variable stars vary in radius and luminosity over time , expanding and contracting with periods ranging from minutes to years , depending on the size of the star .
This category includes Cepheid and Cepheid-like stars , and long-period variables such as Mira .
Around 75 % of modern Spanish is derived from Latin .
Greek has also contributed substantially to Spanish vocabulary , especially through Latin , on which it had a great impact .
The Spanish phonemic inventory consists of five vowel phonemes -LRB- / a / , / e / , / i / , / o / , / u / -RRB- and 17 to 19 consonant phonemes -LRB- the exact number depending on the dialect -RRB- .
Some instances of the mid vowels / e / and / o / , determined lexically , alternate with the diphthongs -LSB- je -RSB- and -LSB- we -RSB- respectively when stressed , in a process that is better described as morphophonemic rather than phonological , as it is not predictable from phonology alone .
Despite American administration after the defeat of Spain in the Spanish -- American War in 1898 , the usage of Spanish continued in Philippine literature and press during the early years of American rule .
Gradually , however , the American government began increasingly promoting the use of English , and it characterized Spanish as a negative influence of the past .
Eventually , by the 1920s , English became the primary language of administration and education .
But despite a significant decrease in influence and speakers , Spanish remained an official language of the Philippines when it became independent in 1946 , alongside English and Filipino , a standardized version of Tagalog .
Conversely , the use of the verb forms of vos with the pronoun tú -LRB- tú pensás or tú pensái -RRB- is called `` verbal voseo '' .
SI prefixes are combined with the word second to denote subdivisions of the second , e.g. , the millisecond -LRB- one thousandth of a second -RRB- , the microsecond -LRB- one millionth of a second -RRB- , and the nanosecond -LRB- one billionth of a second -RRB- .
Though SI prefixes may also be used to form multiples of the second such as kilosecond -LRB- one thousand seconds -RRB- , such units are rarely used in practice .
The more common larger non-SI units of time are not formed by powers of ten ; instead , the second is multiplied by 60 to form a minute , which is multiplied by 60 to form an hour , which is multiplied by 24 to form a day .
The Solar System is the gravitationally bound system comprising the Sun and the objects that orbit it , either directly or indirectly .
Of those objects that orbit the Sun directly , the largest eight are the planets , with the remainder being significantly smaller objects , such as dwarf planets and small Solar System bodies .
Of the objects that orbit the Sun indirectly , the moons , two are larger than the smallest planet , Mercury .
For example , Venus is approximately 0.33 AU farther out from the Sun than Mercury , whereas Saturn is 4.3 AU out from Jupiter , and Neptune lies 10.5 AU out from Uranus .
The images at the beginning of this section show the orbits of the various constituents of the Solar System on different scales .
Short-period comets have orbits lasting less than two hundred years .
Short-period comets are thought to originate in the Kuiper belt , whereas long-period comets , such as Hale -- Bopp , are thought to originate in the Oort cloud .
Many comet groups , such as the Kreutz Sungrazers , formed from the breakup of a single parent .
Some comets with hyperbolic orbits may originate outside the Solar System , but determining their precise orbits is difficult .
Old comets that have had most of their volatiles driven out by solar warming are often categorised as asteroids .
Beyond the orbit of Neptune lies the area of the `` trans-Neptunian region '' , with the doughnut-shaped Kuiper belt , home of Pluto and several other dwarf planets , and an overlapping disc of scattered objects , which is tilted toward the plane of the Solar System and reaches much further out than the Kuiper belt .
It appears to consist overwhelmingly of many thousands of small worlds -- the largest having a diameter only a fifth that of Earth and a mass far smaller than that of the Moon -- composed mainly of rock and ice .
This region is sometimes described as the `` third zone of the Solar System '' , enclosing the inner and the outer Solar System .
The scattered disc , which overlaps the Kuiper belt but extends much further outwards , is thought to be the source of short-period comets .
Scattered-disc objects are thought to have been ejected into erratic orbits by the gravitational influence of Neptune 's early outward migration .
SDOs ' orbits are also highly inclined to the ecliptic plane and are often almost perpendicular to it .
Some astronomers consider the scattered disc to be merely another region of the Kuiper belt and describe scattered disc objects as `` scattered Kuiper belt objects '' .
Alpha Centauri A and B are a closely tied pair of Sun-like stars , whereas the small red dwarf , Proxima Centauri , orbits the pair at a distance of 0.2 light-year .
In 2016 , a potentially habitable exoplanet was confirmed to be orbiting Proxima Centauri , called Proxima Centauri b , the closest confirmed exoplanet to the Sun .
According to this view , there is always an Imam of the Age , who is the divinely appointed authority on all matters of faith and law in the Muslim community .
Ali was the first imam of this line , the rightful successor to Muhammad , followed by male descendants of Muhammad through his daughter Fatimah .
According to Allameh Muzaffar , Allah gives humans the faculty of reason and argument .
Also Allah order human to spend time thinking carefully on creation while he refers to all creations as his signs of power and glory .
These signs encompassed all of universe .
Allah does not accept the faith of those who follow him without thinking and only with imitation but also Allah blames them for such an action .
In other word , human has to think about universe with reason and intellect , a faculty bestowed us by Allah .
Since that there is more insistence on the faculty of intellect among Shia , even evaluating the claims of someone who claim prophecy is on the shoulder of intellect .
In July 1187 Saladin captured most of the Kingdom of Jerusalem .
In this battle alone the Crusader force was largely annihilated by Saladin 's determined army .
Saladin captured Raynald and was personally responsible for his execution in retaliation for his attacks against Muslim caravans .
The members of these caravans had , in vain , besought his mercy by reciting the truce between the Muslims and the Crusaders , but Raynald ignored this and insulted the Islamic prophet , Muhammad , before murdering and torturing a number of them .
Upon hearing this , Saladin swore an oath to personally execute Raynald .
However , his life was spared by Saladin , who said of Raynald , '' -LSB- i -RSB- t is not the wont of kings , to kill kings ; but that man had transgressed all bounds , and therefore did I treat him thus . ''
He gave it to the mother and she took it ; with tears streaming down her face , and hugged the baby to her chest .
The people were watching her and weeping and I -LRB- Ibn Shaddad -RRB- was standing amongst them .
She suckled it for some time and then Saladin ordered a horse to be fetched for her and she went back to camp .
As Suleiman stabilized his European frontiers , he now turned his attention to the ever present threat posed by the Shi'a Safavid dynasty of Persia .
Two events in particular were to precipitate a recurrence of tensions .
First , Shah Tahmasp had the Baghdad governor loyal to Suleiman killed and replaced with an adherent of the Shah , and second , the governor of Bitlis had defected and sworn allegiance to the Safavids .
As a result , in 1533 , Suleiman ordered his Grand Vizier Pargalı Ibrahim Pasha to lead an army into eastern Asia Minor where he retook Bitlis and occupied Tabriz without resistance .
Having joined Ibrahim in 1534 , Suleiman made a push towards Persia , only to find the Shah sacrificing territory instead of facing a pitched battle , resorting to harassment of the Ottoman army as it proceeded along the harsh interior .
When in the following year Suleiman made a grand entrance into Baghdad , he greatly enhanced his prestige by restoring the tomb of Abu Hanifa , the founder of the Hanafi school of Islamic law to which the Ottomans adhered .
Suleiman gave particular attention to the plight of the rayas , Christian subjects who worked the land of the Sipahis .
His Kanune Raya , or `` Code of the Rayas '' , reformed the law governing levies and taxes to be paid by the rayas , raising their status above serfdom to the extent that Christian serfs would migrate to Turkish territories to benefit from the reforms .
The Sultan also played a role in protecting the Jewish subjects of his empire for centuries to come .
In late 1553 or 1554 , on the suggestion of his favorite doctor and dentist , the Spanish Jew Moses Hamon , the Sultan issued a firman -LRB- فرمان -RRB- formally denouncing blood libels against the Jews .
Furthermore , Suleiman enacted new criminal and police legislation , prescribing a set of fines for specific offenses , as well as reducing the instances requiring death or mutilation .
In the area of taxation , taxes were levied on various goods and produce , including animals , mines , profits of trade , and import-export duties .
In addition to taxes , officials who had fallen into disrepute were likely to have their land and property confiscated by the Sultan .
Thus in power struggles apparently instigated by Hürrem , Suleiman had Ibrahim murdered and replaced with her sympathetic son-in-law , Rüstem Pasha .
By 1552 , when the campaign against Persia had begun with Rüstem appointed commander-in-chief of the expedition , intrigues against Mustafa began .
Rüstem sent one of Suleiman 's most trusted men to report that since Suleiman was not at the head of the army , the soldiers thought the time had come to put a younger prince on the throne ; at the same time he spread rumors that Mustafa had proved receptive to the idea .
Angered by what he came to believe were Mustafa 's plans to claim the throne , the following summer upon return from his campaign in Persia , Suleiman summoned him to his tent in the Ereğli valley , stating he would `` be able to clear himself of the crimes he was accused of and would have nothing to fear if he came '' .
As the rate of cooling is increased the carbon will have less time to migrate to form carbide at the grain boundaries but will have increasingly large amounts of pearlite of a finer and finer structure within the grains ; hence the carbide is more widely dispersed and acts to prevent slip of defects within those grains , resulting in hardening of the steel .
At the very high cooling rates produced by quenching , the carbon has no time to migrate but is locked within the face center austenite and forms martensite .
Depending on the carbon content , the martensitic phase takes different forms .
Moreover , there is no compositional change so the atoms generally retain their same neighbors .
Steel manufactured after World War II became contaminated with radionuclides by nuclear weapons testing .
Low-background steel , steel manufactured prior to 1945 , is used for certain radiation-sensitive applications such as Geiger counters and radiation shielding .
Other materials are often added to the iron/carbon mixture to produce steel with desired properties .
Nickel and manganese in steel add to its tensile strength and make the austenite form of the iron-carbon solution more stable , chromium increases hardness and melting temperature , and vanadium also increases hardness while making it less prone to metal fatigue .
For most of the century after the Civil War in the United States , the price of silver was less than the face value of circulating silver coins , reaching its nadir of about $ .25 per ounce in 1932 , and the silver coins of the United States were effectively fiat coins for much of that history .
Silver is used as a currency by many individuals , and is legal tender in the US state of Utah .
Silver coin and bullion is an investment vehicle used by some people to guard against inflation and devaluation of the currency .
Silver is used in the manufacture of crystalline solar photovoltaic panels .
Silver is also used in plasmonic solar cells .
100 million ounces -LRB- 685,714.3 pounds -LRB- 311,034.8 kg -RRB- -RRB- of silver are projected for use by solar energy in 2015 .
Because even when tarnished , silver has superior electrical conductivity , it is used in some electrical and electronic products , notably high quality connectors for RF , VHF , and higher frequencies , particularly in tuned circuits such as cavity filters where conductors can not be scaled by more than 6 % .
Printed circuits and RFID antennas are made with silver paints , and computer keyboards use silver electrical contacts .
Silver cadmium oxide is used in high-voltage contacts because it withstands arcing .
Silver investments of various types are available on stock markets , including mining , silver streaming , and silver-backed exchange-traded funds .
During his service at headquarters , Hitler pursued his artwork , drawing cartoons and instructions for an army newspaper .
During the Battle of the Somme in October 1916 , he was wounded in the left thigh when a shell exploded in the dispatch runners ' dugout .
Hitler spent almost two months in hospital at Beelitz , returning to his regiment on 5 March 1917 .
While there , Hitler learnt of Germany 's defeat , and -- by his own account -- upon receiving this news , he suffered a second bout of blindness .
In a meeting with German military leaders on 3 February 1933 , Hitler spoke of `` conquest for Lebensraum in the East and its ruthless Germanisation '' as his ultimate foreign policy objectives .
In March , Prince Bernhard Wilhelm von Bülow , secretary at the Auswärtiges Amt -LRB- Foreign Office -RRB- , issued a statement of major foreign policy aims : Anschluss with Austria , the restoration of Germany 's national borders of 1914 , rejection of military restrictions under the Treaty of Versailles , the return of the former German colonies in Africa , and a German zone of influence in Eastern Europe .
In speeches during this period , he stressed the peaceful goals of his policies and a willingness to work within international agreements .
At the first meeting of his cabinet in 1933 , Hitler prioritised military spending over unemployment relief .
Germany reoccupied the demilitarised zone in the Rhineland in March 1936 , in violation of the Versailles Treaty .
Hitler also sent troops to Spain to support General Franco during the Spanish Civil War after receiving an appeal for help in July 1936 .
At the same time , Hitler continued his efforts to create an Anglo-German alliance .
In August 1936 , in response to a growing economic crisis caused by his rearmament efforts , Hitler ordered Göring to implement a Four Year Plan to prepare Germany for war within the next four years .
The plan envisaged an all-out struggle between `` Judeo-Bolshevism '' and German national socialism , which in Hitler 's view required a committed effort of rearmament regardless of the economic costs .
This forced Hitler to call off Fall Grün , originally planned for 1 October 1938 .
On 29 September Hitler , Neville Chamberlain , Édouard Daladier , and Mussolini attended a one-day conference in Munich that led to the Munich Agreement , which handed over the Sudetenland districts to Germany .
Nazi official Hans Frank suggested that Alois 's mother had been employed as a housekeeper by a Jewish family in Graz , and that the family 's 19-year-old son Leopold Frankenberger had fathered Alois .
No Frankenberger was registered in Graz during that period , and no record has been produced of Leopold Frankenberger 's existence , so historians dismiss the claim that Alois 's father was Jewish .
Union of the sets A and B , denoted A ∪ B , is the set of all objects that are a member of A , or B , or both .
Set theory as a foundation for mathematical analysis , topology , abstract algebra , and discrete mathematics is likewise uncontroversial ; mathematicians accept that -LRB- in principle -RRB- theorems in these areas can be derived from the relevant definitions and the axioms of set theory .
One verification project , Metamath , includes human-written , computer‐verified derivations of more than 12,000 theorems starting from ZFC set theory , first order logic and propositional logic .
Determinacy refers to the fact that , under appropriate assumptions , certain two-player games of perfect information are determined from the start in the sense that one player must have a winning strategy .
The existence of these strategies has important consequences in descriptive set theory , as the assumption that a broader class of games is determined often implies that a broader class of sets will have a topological property .
The axiom of determinacy -LRB- AD -RRB- is an important object of study ; although incompatible with the axiom of choice , AD implies that all subsets of the real line are well behaved -LRB- in particular , measurable and with the perfect set property -RRB- .
AD can be used to prove that the Wadge degrees have an elegant structure .
Sima has often been criticized for `` historizing '' myths and legends as he assigned dates to mythical and legendary figures from ancient Chinese history together with what appears to be suspiciously precise genealogies of leading families over the course of several millennia -LRB- including his own where he traces the descent of the Sima family from legendary emperors in the distant past -RRB- .
However , archaeological discoveries in recent decades have confirmed aspects of the Shiji , and suggested that even if the sections of the Shiji dealing with the ancient past are not totally true , that at least Sima wrote down what he believed to be true .
In particular , archaeological finds have confirmed the basic accuracy of the Shiji including the reigns and locations of tombs of ancient rulers .
Sanskrit is used extensively in the Carnatic and Hindustani branches of classical music .
The samaveda uses musical notations in several of its recessions .
The Indian guided missile program that was commenced in 1983 by the Defence Research and Development Organisation has named the five missiles -LRB- ballistic and others -RRB- that it developed Prithvi , Agni , Akash , Nag and the Trishul missile system .
India 's first modern fighter aircraft is named HAL Tejas .
In order to explain the common features shared by Sanskrit and other Indo-European languages , the Indo-Aryan migration theory states that the original speakers of what became Sanskrit arrived in the Indian subcontinent from the north-west some time during the early second millennium BCE .
Evidence for such a theory includes the close relationship between the Indo-Iranian tongues and the Baltic and Slavic languages , vocabulary exchange with the non-Indo-European Uralic languages , and the nature of the attested Indo-European words for flora and fauna .
Sanskrit linguist Madhav Deshpande says that when the term `` Sanskrit '' arose it was not thought of as a specific language set apart from other languages , but rather as a particularly refined or perfected manner of speaking .
Knowledge of Sanskrit was a marker of social class and educational attainment in ancient India , and the language was taught mainly to members of the higher castes through the close analysis of Vyākaraṇins such as Pāṇini and Patanjali , who exhorted proper Sanskrit at all times , especially during ritual .
Sanskrit , as the learned language of Ancient India , thus existed alongside the vernacular Prakrits , which were Middle Indo-Aryan languages .
However , linguistic change led to an eventual loss of mutual intelligibility .
In Southeast Asia , languages such as Thai and Lao contain many loanwords from Sanskrit , as do Khmer .
For example , in Thai , Ravana , the emperor of Lanka , is called Thosakanth , a derivation of his Sanskrit name Dāśakaṇṭha `` having ten necks '' .
Classical Sanskrit is the standard register as laid out in the grammar of Pāṇini , around the fourth century BCE .
Besides drastic changes to the social structure of Japan , in an attempt to create a strong centralized state defining its national identity , the government established a dominant national dialect , called `` standard language '' -LRB- 標準語 , hyōjungo -RRB- , that replaced local and regional dialects and was based on the patterns of Tokyo 's samurai classes .
This dialect eventually became the norm in the realms of education , media , government and business .
All Tokugawa lands were seized and placed under `` imperial control '' , thus placing them under the prerogative of the new Meiji government .
With Fuhanken sanchisei , the areas were split into three types : urban prefectures -LRB- 府 , fu -RRB- , rural prefectures -LRB- 県 , ken -RRB- and the already existing domains .
Sydney is divided into local government areas -LRB- also known as councils or shires -RRB- which are comparable in nature to London 's boroughs .
These local government areas have elected councils which are responsible for functions delegated to them by the New South Wales Government .
The 31 local government areas making up Sydney according to the New South Wales Division of Local Government are :
There are six public universities based in Sydney : the University of Sydney , the University of New South Wales , the University of Technology Sydney , Macquarie University , the Western Sydney University , and the Australian Catholic University .
Four public universities maintain secondary campuses in the city : the University of Notre Dame Australia , the University of Wollongong , Curtin University of Technology , and the University of Newcastle .
5.2 % of residents of Sydney are attending a university .
The University of Sydney was established in 1850 and remains the oldest university in Australia while the other city 's universities were all founded after World War II .
The Universities of New South Wales and Sydney are similarly ranked in the top 50 in the world , the University of Technology Sydney is ranked 193 , while Macquarie University ranks 237 , and the Western Sydney University below 500 .
7.8 % of Sydney residents are attending primary school and 6.4 % are enrolled in secondary school .
There are 935 public preschool , primary , and secondary schools in Sydney that are administered by the New South Wales Department of Education .
14 of the 17 selective secondary schools in New South Wales are based in Sydney .
The City of Sydney became the first council in Australia to achieve formal certification as carbon-neutral in 2008 .
The city has reduced its 2007 carbon emissions by 6 % and since 2006 has reduced carbon emissions from city buildings by up to 20 % .
The City of Sydney introduced a Sustainable Sydney 2030 program , with various targets planned and a comprehensive guide on how to reduce energy in homes and offices within Sydney by 30 % .
Reductions in energy consumption have slashed energy bills by $ 30 million a year .
Solar panels have been established on many CBD buildings in an effort to minimise carbon pollution by around 3,000 tonnes a year .
The two distributors which maintain Sydney 's electricity infrastructure are Ausgrid and Endeavour Energy .
Their combined networks include over 815,000 power poles and 83,000 kilometres -LRB- 52,000 miles -RRB- of electricity cables .
Macquarie undertook an extensive building programme of some 265 separate works .
Roads , bridges , wharves , and public buildings were constructed using convict labour and come 1822 the town had banks , markets , and well-established thoroughfares .
Part of Macquarie 's effort to transform the colony was his authorisation for convicts to re-enter society as free citizens .
The Sydney Basin bioregion includes coastal features of cliffs , beaches , and estuaries .
Deep river valleys known as rias were carved during the Triassic period in the Hawkesbury sandstone of the coastal region where Sydney now lies .
The rising sea level between 18,000 and 6,000 years ago flooded the rias to form estuaries and deep harbours .
Port Jackson , better known as Sydney Harbour , is one such ria .
Lieutenant William Dawes produced a town plan in 1790 but it was ignored by the colony 's leaders .
Sydney 's layout today reflects this lack of planning .
The geographical area covered by urban Sydney is divided into 658 suburbs for addressing and postal purposes and is administered as 40 local government areas .
Several localities , distinct from suburbs , exist throughout Sydney 's inner reaches .
Pyrmont located on the harbour was redeveloped from a centre of shipping and international trade to an area of high density housing , tourist accommodation , and gambling .
The terrace style housing has largely been retained and Darlinghurst has undergone significant gentrification since the 1980s .
The North Shore , an informal geographic term referring to the northern metropolitan area of Sydney , consists of Artarmon , Chatswood , Roseville , Lindfield , Killara , Gordon , Pymble , Hornsby and many others .
The North Shore includes the commercial centres of North Sydney and Chatswood .
North Sydney itself consists of a large commercial centre , with its own business centre , which contains the second largest concentration of high-rise buildings in Sydney , after the CBD .
North Sydney is dominated by advertising , marketing businesses and associated trades , with many large corporations holding office in the region .
The city also received 8.3 million domestic overnight visitors in 2013 who spent a total of $ 6 billion .
26,700 workers in the City of Sydney were directly employed by tourism in 2011 .
There were 480,000 visitors and 27,500 people staying overnight each day in 2012 .
On average , the tourism industry contributes $ 36 million to the city 's economy per day .
The Museum of Contemporary Art was opened in 1991 and occupies an Art Deco building in Circular Quay .
Its collection was founded in the 1940s by artist and art collector John Power and has been maintained by the University of Sydney .
Sydney 's other significant art institution is the Art Gallery of New South Wales which coordinates the coveted Archibald Prize for portraiture .
Contemporary art galleries are found in Waterloo , Surry Hills , Darlinghurst , Paddington , Chippendale , Newtown , and Woollahra .
The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea mentions swords of Indian iron and steel being exported from India to Greece .
Sri Lankan and Indian Blades made of Damascus steel also found their way into Persia .
Civilian use of swords became increasingly common during the late Renaissance , with duels being a preferred way to honourably settle disputes .
The practice of civilian duelling , with specifically designed civilian swords such as the Italian Cinquedea and Swiss Baselard , became so popular that according to one scholar : `` In France during the reign of Henry IV -LRB- 1589 -- 1610 -RRB- , more than 4,000 French aristocrats were killed in duels in an eighteen-year period ... During the reign of Louis XIII -LRB- 1610 -- 1643 -RRB- ... in a twenty-year period 8,000 pardons were issued for murders associated with duels . ''
Towards the end of its useful life , the sword served more as a weapon of self-defence than for use on the battlefield , and the military importance of swords steadily decreased during the Modern Age .
Even as a personal sidearm , the sword began to lose its preeminence in the early 19th century , reflecting the development of reliable handguns .
The sword consists of the blade and the hilt .
The term scabbard applies to the cover for the sword blade when not in use .
Myrvold notes that copies of the Guru Granth Sahib are not regarded as material objects , but as living subjects which are alive .
Sikhs are well aware that the book itself `` can not come alive in a human sense , '' they treat it as a person , for which funerary services are performed when the copy is old and damaged :
People eat together , and the kitchen is maintained and serviced by Sikhs .
The majority of Sikh scriptures were originally written in Gurmukhī alphabet , a script standardised by Guru Angad out of Laṇḍā scripts used in North India .
Adherents of Sikhism are known as Sikhs , which means students or disciples of the Guru .
The anglicized word ` Sikhism ' is derived from the Punjabi verb Sikhi , with roots in Sikhana -LRB- to learn -RRB- , and Sikhi connotes the `` temporal path of learning '' .
In recent years , instead of Diwali , the post-2003 calendar released by SGPC has named it the Bandi Chhor divas .
Sikhs celebrate Guru Hargobind 's release from the Gwalior Fort , with several innocent Hindu kings who were also imprisoned by Mughal Emperor Jahangir in 1619 .
This day continues to be commemorated on the same day of Hindu festival of Diwali , with lights , fireworks and festivities .
Sikhism is a monistic religion and states that there is one supreme entity holding control of the entire universe .
This entity is referred to as Ik Onkar .
Baptised Sikhs ritually wear five items , called the Five Ks -LRB- in Punjabi known as pañj kakkē or pañj kakār -RRB- , at all times .
Although the Sikh Gurus and Sikh religious teachings criticize the hierarchy of the caste system , the caste system is still present in some Sikh communities .
The caste system is most commonly still employed in rural Punjabi villages .
According to Sunrinder S , Jodhka , the Sikh religion does not advocate discrimination against any caste or creed , however , in practice , Sikhs belonging to the landowning dominant castes have not shed all their prejudices against the lower castes or dalits .
While dalits would be allowed entry into the village gurudwaras they would not be permitted to cook or serve langar -LRB- communal meal -RRB- .
Therefore , wherever they could mobilise resources , the dalits of Punjab have tried to construct their own gurudwara and other local level institutions in order to attain a certain degree of cultural autonomy .
In 1953 , the government of India acceded to the demands of the Sikh leader , Master Tara Singh , to include Sikh castes of the converted untouchables in the list of scheduled castes .
In the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee , 20 of the 140 seats are reserved for low-caste Sikhs .
Keratinocytes in the stratum basale proliferate through mitosis and the daughter cells move up the strata changing shape and composition as they undergo multiple stages of cell differentiation to eventually become anucleated .
During that process , keratinocytes will become highly organized , forming cellular junctions -LRB- desmosomes -RRB- between each other and secreting keratin proteins and lipids which contribute to the formation of an extracellular matrix and provide mechanical strength to the skin .
Keratinocytes from the stratum corneum are eventually shed from the surface -LRB- desquamation -RRB- .
As mentioned below , the conception of Naqshbandi may require more elaboration and clarity as the explanation to this effect creating ambiguity and complicity with in it .
In other words , `` Naqshbandi '' may be taken as `` followup or like a flow chart '' of practices exercised by the head of this school of thought .
The `` Noorbakshia '' -LRB- Arabic : ش -RRB- also called Nubakshia is an Islamic sect and the Sufi order and way that claims to trace its direct spiritual lineage and chain -LRB- silsilah -RRB- to the Islamic prophet Muhammad , through Ali , by way of Imam Ali Al-Ridha .
This order became famous as Nurbakshi after Shah Syed Muhammad Nurbakhsh Qahistani who was attached with Kubrawiya order Sufi order -LRB- `` tariqa '' -RRB- .
The Persian poet Rumi , who was born in present-day Afghanistan , has become one of the most widely read poets in the United States , thanks largely to the interpretative translations published by Coleman Barks .
Elif Şafak 's novel The Forty Rules of Love tells the story of Rumi becoming a disciple of the Persian dervish Shams Tabrizi .
Furthermore , between 1910 and 1911 one of the first Sufi journals , called Hikmet , was published in Istanbul by Ahmad Hilmi of Filibe .
Another Sufi-oriented journal was published in Egypt between 1931 and 1934 .
Al-Maʿrifa informed among others about Sufi moral and wisdom .
Others have suggested that the word comes from the term ahl aṣ-ṣuffah -LRB- `` the people of the bench '' -RRB- , who were a group of impoverished companions of Muhammad who held regular gatherings of dhikr .
These men and women who sat at al-Masjid an-Nabawi are considered by some to be the first Sufis .
Al-Qushayri and Ibn Khaldun both rejected all possibilities other than ṣūf on linguistic grounds .
He was born in a Berber family , in Aïn Madhi , present-day Algeria and died in Fez , Morocco at the age of 80 .
Muhyiddin Muhammad b. ` Ali Ibn ` Arabi -LRB- or Ibn al - ` Arabi -RRB- AH 561 - AH 638 -LRB- July 28 , 1165 -- November 10 , 1240 -RRB- is considered to be one of the most important Sufi masters , although he never founded any order -LRB- tariqa -RRB- .
His writings , especially al-Futuhat al-Makkiyya and Fusus al-hikam , have been studied within all the Sufi orders as the clearest expression of tawhid -LRB- Divine Unity -RRB- , though because of their recondite nature they were often only given to initiates .
Later those who followed his teaching became known as the school of wahdat al-wujud -LRB- the Oneness of Being -RRB- .
He himself considered his writings to have been divinely inspired .
The contours of the modern samba came only at the end of the 1920s , from the innovations of a group of composers of carnival blocks in the neighborhoods of Estácio de Sá and Osvaldo Cruz , and the hills of Mangueira , Salgueiro , and São Carlos .
The success of the samba in Europe and Japan only confirms its ability to win fans , regardless of their language .
Currently , there are hundreds of samba schools held on European soil and scattered among countries like Germany , Belgium , Netherlands , France , Sweden , and Switzerland .
Already in Japan , the records invest heavily in the launch of former Sambista 's set of discs , which eventually created a market composed solely of catalogs of Japanese record labels .
However , before this type of samba was to consolidate as the `` national samba '' in Brazil , there were traditional forms of sambas in Bahia and São Paulo .
One of the most noticeable groups of São Paulo 's samba , Demônios da Garoa -LRB- Drizzle 's Demons -RRB- , had a strong link with Adoniran Barbosa , who composed their songs .
Songs like `` Samba do Arnesto '' and `` Saudosa Maloca '' became legendary , recognized as `` the real Samba Paulistano '' .
According to the folklore of that time , for a samba musician to achieve success , he would have to pass the house of Tia Ciata and be approved on the rodas de samba .
Many compositions were created and sung in improvisation , where the samba Pelo Telefone -LRB- from Donga and Mauro de Almeida -RRB- , samba for which there were also many other versions , but to come to the history of samba , Pelo Telefone was the first recorded Samba , in 1917
Meanwhile , other recordings have been done as samba before Pelo Telefone , as this composition was done by double Donga / Mauro de Almeida , who is regarded as a founder of the genre .
Still , the song is written and discussed , and its proximity to the maxixe made it finally be designated samba-maxixe .
This section was influenced by maxixe dance and basically played the piano -- unlike the Rio samba played in the Morros hills -- and the composer has musician Sinhô , self-titled o rei do samba -LRB- `` the king of Samba '' -RRB- which with other pioneers such as Heitor dos Prazeres and Caninha , lay the first foundations of the musical genre .
In the 1960s , Brazil became politically divided with the arrival of a military dictatorship , and the leftist musicians of bossa nova started to gather attention to the music made in the favelas .
Many popular artists were discovered at this time .
Musicians like Cartola , Nelson Cavaquinho , Guilherme de Brito , Velha Guarda da Portela , Zé Keti , and Clementina de Jesus recorded their first albums during this time .
Also in the 1960s came the samba funk .
The samba-funk emerged at the end of the 1960s with pianist Dom Salvador and his group , which merged the samba with American funk , which was then newly arrived in the Brazil .
With the departure of Dom Salvador to the United States , the band broke up , but at the beginning of the 1970s , some ex-members , including Luiz Carlos , José Carlos Barroso , and Oberdan joined Christovao Bastos , Jamil Joanes , Cláudio Stevenson and Lúcio da Silva to form Banda Black Rio .
The new group has deepened the work of Don Salvador in the double mixture of the bar with the Brazilian samba funk of the American Quaternary , based on the dynamics of implementation , driven by drums and bass .
Even after the Banda Black Rio in the 1980s , British disc jockeys began to play the group 's work .
Samba continued to act as a unifying agent during the 1990s , when Rio stood as a national Brazilian symbol .
Even though it was not the capital city , Rio acted as a Brazilian unifier , and the fact that samba originated in Rio helped the unification process .
In 1994 , the FIFA World Cup had its own samba composed for the occasion , the `` Copa 94 '' .
The 1994 FIFA World Cup , in which samba played a major cultural role , holds the record for highest attendance in World Cup history .
Samba is thought to be able to unify because individuals participate in it regardless of social or ethnic group .
Today , samba is viewed as perhaps the only uniting factor in a country fragmented by political division .
Other differences between the principal and secondary eyes are that the latter have rhabdomeres that point away from incoming light , just like in vertebrates , while the arrangement is the opposite in the former .
Like most arthropods , spiders lack balance and acceleration sensors and rely on their eyes to tell them which way is up .
Arthropods ' proprioceptors , sensors that report the force exerted by muscles and the degree of bending in the body and joints , are well understood .
On the other hand , little is known about what other internal sensors spiders or other arthropods may have .
Varying placement of webs allows different species of spider to trap different insects in the same area , for example flat horizontal webs trap insects that fly up from vegetation underneath while flat vertical webs trap insects in horizontal flight .
Mature female bolas spiders of the genus Mastophora build `` webs '' that consist of only a single `` trapeze line '' , which they patrol .
They also construct a bolas made of a single thread , tipped with a large ball of very wet sticky silk .
They emit chemicals that resemble the pheromones of moths , and then swing the bolas at the moths .
The spiders eat the bolas if they have not made a kill in about 30 minutes , rest for a while , and then make new bolas .
Juveniles and adult males are much smaller and do not make bolas .
Instead they release different pheromones that attract moth flies , and catch them with their front pairs of legs .
Many of the family Theraphosidae , which includes tarantulas and baboon spiders , have urticating hairs on their abdomens and use their legs to flick them at attackers .
The barbs cause intense irritation but there is no evidence that they carry any kind of venom .
A few defend themselves against wasps by including networks of very robust threads in their webs , giving the spider time to flee while the wasps are struggling with the obstacles .
The golden wheeling spider , Carparachne aureoflava , of the Namibian desert escapes parasitic wasps by flipping onto its side and cartwheeling down sand dunes .
As arthropods they have : segmented bodies with jointed limbs , all covered in a cuticle made of chitin and proteins ; heads that are composed of several segments that fuse during the development of the embryo .
Being chelicerates , their bodies consist of two tagmata , sets of segments that serve similar functions : the foremost one , called the cephalothorax or prosoma , is a complete fusion of the segments that in an insect would form two separate tagmata , the head and thorax ; the rear tagma is called the abdomen or opisthosoma .
In spiders , the cephalothorax and abdomen are connected by a small cylindrical section , the pedicel .
The pattern of segment fusion that forms chelicerates ' heads is unique among arthropods , and what would normally be the first head segment disappears at an early stage of development , so that chelicerates lack the antennae typical of most arthropods .
In fact , chelicerates ' only appendages ahead of the mouth are a pair of chelicerae , and they lack anything that would function directly as `` jaws '' .
The first appendages behind the mouth are called pedipalps , and serve different functions within different groups of chelicerates .
He and his contemporary , Lev Kuleshov , two of the earliest film theorists , argued that montage was the essence of the cinema .
His articles and books -- particularly Film Form and The Film Sense -- explain the significance of montage in detail .
Lessons from this scenario delved into the character of Jean-Jacques Dessalines , replaying his movements , actions , and the drama surrounding him .
Further to the didactics of literary and dramatic content , Eisenstein taught the technicalities of directing , photography , and editing , while encouraging his students ' development of individuality , expressiveness , and creativity .
Eisenstein 's pedagogy , like his films , were politically charged and contained quotes from Vladimir Lenin interwoven with his teaching .
It was mostly his international critical renown which enabled Eisenstein to direct October -LRB- aka Ten Days That Shook The World -RRB- as part of a grand tenth anniversary celebration of the October Revolution of 1917 , and then The General Line -LRB- aka Old and New -RRB- .
The critics of the outside world praised them , but at home , Eisenstein 's focus in these films on structural issues such as camera angles , crowd movements , and montage brought him and like-minded others , such as Vsevolod Pudovkin and Alexander Dovzhenko , under fire from the Soviet film community , forcing him to issue public articles of self-criticism and commitments to reform his cinematic visions to conform to the increasingly specific doctrines of socialist realism .
Kiswahili is the Swahili word for the language and is also sometimes used in English .
The name Swahili comes from the plural sawāḥil -LRB- سواحل -RRB- of the Arabic word sāḥil -LRB- ساحل -RRB- , meaning `` boundary '' or `` coast '' , used as an adjective meaning `` coastal dwellers '' .
With the prefix ki - , it means `` coastal language '' , ki - being a prefix attached to nouns of the noun class such as languages .
Despite its initial focus on the elites , the Union was successful in raising funds from across French society .
Laboulaye 's political allies supported the call , as did descendants of the French contingent in the American Revolutionary War .
Less idealistically , contributions came from those who hoped for American support in the French attempt to build the Panama Canal .
The copper may have come from multiple sources and some of it is said to have come from a mine in Visnes , Norway , though this has not been conclusively determined after testing samples .
According to Cara Sutherland in her book on the statue for the Museum of the City of New York , 90,800 kilos -LRB- 200,000 pounds -RRB- was needed to build the statue , and the French copper industrialist Eugène Secrétan donated 58,100 kilos -LRB- 128,000 pounds -RRB- of copper .
Grover Cleveland , the governor of New York , vetoed a bill to provide $ 50,000 for the statue project in 1884 .
An attempt the next year to have Congress provide $ 100,000 , sufficient to complete the project , also failed .
The New York committee , with only $ 3,000 in the bank , suspended work on the pedestal .
With the project in jeopardy , groups from other American cities , including Boston and Philadelphia , offered to pay the full cost of erecting the statue in return for relocating it .
Bartholdi suggested gilding the statue to increase its ability to reflect light , but this proved too expensive .
The United States Lighthouse Board took over the Statue of Liberty in 1887 and pledged to install equipment to enhance the torch 's effect ; in spite of its efforts , the statue remained virtually invisible at night .
When Bartholdi returned to the United States in 1893 , he made additional suggestions , all of which proved ineffective .
He did successfully lobby for improved lighting within the statue , allowing visitors to better appreciate Eiffel 's design .
In 1901 , President Theodore Roosevelt , once a member of the New York committee , ordered the statue 's transfer to the War Department , as it had proved useless as a lighthouse .
A unit of the Army Signal Corps was stationed on Bedloe 's Island until 1923 , after which military police remained there while the island was under military jurisdiction .
The statue was reopened on October 28 , 2012 , only to close again a day later due to Hurricane Sandy .
Although the storm did not harm the statue , it destroyed some of the infrastructure on both Liberty Island and Ellis Island , severely damaging the dock used by the ferries bearing visitors to the statue .
On November 8 , 2012 , a Park Service spokesperson announced that both islands would remain closed for an indefinite period for repairs to be done .
Due to lack of electricity on Liberty Island , a generator was installed to power temporary floodlights to illuminate the statue at night .
The superintendent of Statue of Liberty National Monument , David Luchsinger , whose home on the island was severely damaged , stated that it would be `` optimistically ... months '' before the island was reopened to the public .
The statue and Liberty Island reopened to the public on July 4 , 2013 .
Ellis Island remained closed for repairs for several more months but reopened in late October 2013 .
For part of October 2013 , Liberty Island was closed to the public due to the United States federal government shutdown of 2013 , along with other federally funded museums , parks , monuments , construction projects and buildings .
The first military submarine was the Turtle -LRB- 1775 -RRB- , a hand-powered acorn-shaped device designed by the American David Bushnell to accommodate a single person .
To communicate with other submarines , a system known as Gertrude is used .
Voice communication from one submarine is transmitted by low power speakers into the water , where it is detected by passive sonars on the receiving submarine .
The range of this system is probably very short , and using it radiates sound into the water , which can be heard by the enemy .
In an emergency , submarines can transmit a signal to other ships .
The crew can use Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment to abandon the submarine .
The crew can prevent a lung injury from the pressure change known as pulmonary barotrauma by exhaling during the ascent .
Following escape from a pressurized submarine , the crew is at risk of developing decompression sickness .
In October 1850 , already an accomplished mathematician , Maxwell left Scotland for the University of Cambridge .
At Trinity he was elected to the elite secret society known as the Cambridge Apostles .
Maxwell 's intellectual understanding of his Christian faith and of science grew rapidly during his Cambridge years .
He joined the `` Apostles '' , an exclusive debating society of the intellectual elite , where through his essays he sought to work out this understanding .
With the coloured spinning tops invented by Forbes , Maxwell was able to demonstrate that white light would result from a mixture of red , green , and blue light .
His paper Experiments on Colour laid out the principles of colour combination and was presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in March 1855 .
Between 1859 and 1866 , he developed the theory of the distributions of velocities in particles of a gas , work later generalised by Ludwig Boltzmann .
The formula , called the Maxwell -- Boltzmann distribution , gives the fraction of gas molecules moving at a specified velocity at any given temperature .
In the kinetic theory , temperatures and heat involve only molecular movement .
This approach generalised the previously established laws of thermodynamics and explained existing observations and experiments in a better way than had been achieved previously .
Maxwell 's work on thermodynamics led him to devise the thought experiment that came to be known as Maxwell 's demon , where the second law of thermodynamics is violated by an imaginary being capable of sorting particles by energy .
Maxwell published a paper On governors in the Proceedings of Royal Society , vol .
This paper is considered a central paper of the early days of control theory .
Here `` governors '' refers to the governor or the centrifugal governor used to regulate steam engines .
Kālidāsa -LRB- Sanskrit : कालिदासः -RRB- was a Classical Sanskrit writer , widely regarded as the greatest poet and dramatist in the Sanskrit language .
His plays and poetry are primarily based on the Indian Puranas .
Kalla further argues that this branch was not known outside of Kashmir at that time .
Pebble tools are found the latest first in southern Europe and then in northern .
The mountains of Italy are rising at a rapid rate in the framework of geologic time ; at 1.6 mya they were lower and covered with grassland -LRB- as much of the highlands still are -RRB- .
Europe was otherwise mountainous and covered over with dense forest , a formidable terrain for warm-weather savanna dwellers .
The Americas were colonised via the Bering land bridge which was exposed during this period by lower sea levels .
These people are called the Paleo-Indians , and the earliest accepted dates are those of the Clovis culture sites , some 13,500 years ago .
Globally , societies were hunter-gatherers but evidence of regional identities begins to appear in the wide variety of stone tool types being developed to suit very different environments .
In paleolithic times , mostly animals were painted , in theory ones that were used as food or represented strength , such as the rhinoceros or large cats -LRB- as in the Chauvet Cave -RRB- .
Rare human representations include handprints and half-human/half-animal figures .
The Cave of Chauvet in the Ardèche département , France , contains the most important cave paintings of the paleolithic era , dating from about 36,000 BCE .
With Necho 's death , work was discontinued .
Herodotus tells that the reason the project was abandoned was because of a warning received from an oracle that others would benefit from its successful completion .
Necho 's war with Nebuchadnezzar II most probably prevented the canal 's continuation .
Later , Napoleon , who would become French Emperor in 1804 , contemplated the construction of a north -- south canal to connect the Mediterranean with the Red Sea .
But the plan was abandoned because it wrongly concluded that the waterway would require locks to operate .
These would be very expensive and take a long time to construct .
This decision was based on an erroneous belief that the Red Sea was 10 m -LRB- 33 ft -RRB- higher than the Mediterranean .
The error was the result of using fragmentary survey measurements taken in wartime during Napoleon 's Egyptian Expedition .
In 1819 the Pacha of Egypt undertook some canal work .
The canal allows passage of ships up to 20 m -LRB- 66 ft -RRB- draft or 240,000 deadweight tons and up to a height of 68 m -LRB- 223 ft -RRB- above water level and a maximum beam of 77.5 m -LRB- 254 ft -RRB- under certain conditions .
The canal can handle more traffic and larger ships than the Panama Canal , as Suezmax dimensions are greater than both Panamax and New Panamax .
Some supertankers are too large to traverse the canal .
Others can offload part of their cargo onto a canal-owned boat to reduce their draft , transit , and reload at the other end of the canal .
The Suez Canal Bridge -LRB- 30.828248 ° N 32.317572 ° E / 30.828248 ; 32.317572 -LRB- Suez Canal Bridge -RRB- -RRB- , also called the Egyptian-Japanese Friendship Bridge , a high-level road bridge at El Qantara .
Invasive species originated from the Red Sea and introduced into the Mediterranean by the canal have become a major component of the Mediterranean ecosystem and have serious impacts on the ecology , endangering many local and endemic species .
About 300 species from the Red Sea have been identified in the Mediterranean , and there are probably others yet unidentified .
The Egyptian government 's intent to enlarge the canal has raised concerns from marine biologists , fearing that this will worsen the invasion of Red Sea species .
The shedding of scales is called ecdysis -LRB- or in normal usage , molting or sloughing -RRB- .
In the case of snakes , the complete outer layer of skin is shed in one layer .
Snake scales are not discrete , but extensions of the epidermis -- hence they are not shed separately but as a complete outer layer during each molt , akin to a sock being turned inside out .
A poison is inhaled or ingested , whereas venom produced by snakes is injected into its victim via fangs .
There are , however , two exceptions : Rhabdophis sequesters toxins from the toads it eats , then secretes them from nuchal glands to ward off predators , and a small unusual population of garter snakes in the U.S. state of Oregon retains enough toxins in their livers from the newts they eat to be effectively poisonous to small local predators -LRB- such as crows and foxes -RRB- .
The fossil record of snakes is relatively poor because snake skeletons are typically small and fragile making fossilization uncommon .
Fossils readily identifiable as snakes -LRB- though often retaining hind limbs -RRB- first appear in the fossil record during the Cretaceous period .
The earliest known true snake fossils -LRB- members of the crown group Serpentes -RRB- come from the marine simoliophiids , the oldest of which is the Late Cretaceous -LRB- Cenomanian age -RRB- Haasiophis terrasanctus , dated to between 112 and 94 million years old .
All snakes are strictly carnivorous , eating small animals including lizards , frogs , other snakes , small mammals , birds , eggs , fish , snails or insects .
-LSB- 3 -RSB- Because snakes can not bite or tear their food to pieces , they must swallow prey whole .
Smaller snakes eat smaller prey .
Juvenile pythons might start out feeding on lizards or mice and graduate to small deer or antelope as an adult , for example .
In this mode , the posteriorly moving waves push against contact points in the environment , such as rocks , twigs , irregularities in the soil , etc. .
Each of these environmental objects , in turn , generates a reaction force directed forward and towards the midline of the snake , resulting in forward thrust while the lateral components cancel out .
The speed of this movement depends upon the density of push-points in the environment , with a medium density of about 8 along the snake 's length being ideal .
The wave speed is precisely the same as the snake speed , and as a result , every point on the snake 's body follows the path of the point ahead of it , allowing snakes to move through very dense vegetation and small openings .
India is often called the land of snakes and is steeped in tradition regarding snakes .
Snakes are worshipped as gods even today with many women pouring milk on snake pits -LRB- despite snakes ' aversion for milk -RRB- .
The cobra is seen on the neck of Shiva and Vishnu is depicted often as sleeping on a seven-headed snake or within the coils of a serpent .
There are also several temples in India solely for cobras sometimes called Nagraj -LRB- King of Snakes -RRB- and it is believed that snakes are symbols of fertility .
There is a Hindu festival called Nag Panchami each year on which day snakes are venerated and prayed to .
which is a solution for the equation bx + c = dx + e equivalent to x = e − c/b − d , where rupas refers to the constants c and e .
The two square-roots , divided by the additive or the subtractive , are the additive rupas .
Given the lengths of the sides of any cyclic quadrilateral , Brahmagupta gave an approximate and an exact formula for the figure 's area ,
Later , Brahmagupta moved to Ujjain , which was also a major centre for astronomy .
At the mature age of 67 , he composed his next well known work Khanda-khādyaka , which is a practical manual of Indian astronomy in the karana category meant to be used by students .
The analogous competition for women 's national teams , the Fed Cup , was founded as the Federation Cup in 1963 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the ITF .
The International Tennis Federation -LRB- ITF -RRB- conducts a junior tour that allows juniors to establish a world ranking and an Association of Tennis Professionals -LRB- ATP -RRB- or Women 's Tennis Association -LRB- WTA -RRB- ranking .
Most juniors who enter the international circuit do so by progressing through ITF , Satellite , Future , and Challenger tournaments before entering the main circuit .
Some juniors , however , such as Australian Lleyton Hewitt and Frenchman Gaël Monfils , have catapulted directly from the junior tour to the ATP tour by dominating the junior scene or by taking advantage of opportunities given to them to participate in professional tournaments .
A grip is a way of holding the racket in order to hit shots during a match .
The grip affects the angle of the racket face when it hits the ball and influences the pace , spin , and placement of the shot .
Players use various grips during play , including the Continental -LRB- The `` Handshake Grip '' -RRB- , Eastern -LRB- Can be either semi-eastern or full eastern .
Usually used for backhands . -RRB-
Most players change grips during a match depending on what shot they are hitting ; for example , slice shots and serves call for a Continental grip .
Technology is often a consequence of science and engineering , although technology as a human activity precedes the two fields .
For example , science might study the flow of electrons in electrical conductors by using already-existing tools and knowledge .
This new-found knowledge may then be used by engineers to create new tools and machines such as semiconductors , computers , and other forms of advanced technology .
In this sense , scientists and engineers may both be considered technologists ; the three fields are often considered as one for the purposes of research and reference .
Man 's technological ascent began in earnest in what is known as the Neolithic Period -LRB- `` New Stone Age '' -RRB- .
The invention of polished stone axes was a major advance that allowed forest clearance on a large scale to create farms .
Agriculture fed larger populations , and the transition to sedentism allowed simultaneously raising more children , as infants no longer needed to be carried , as nomadic ones must .
Additionally , children could contribute labor to the raising of crops more readily than they could to the hunter-gatherer economy .
Many , such as the Luddites and prominent philosopher Martin Heidegger , hold serious , although not entirely , deterministic reservations about technology -LRB- see `` The Question Concerning Technology '' -RRB- .
According to Heidegger scholars Hubert Dreyfus and Charles Spinosa , `` Heidegger does not oppose technology .
Indeed , he promises that ` when we once open ourselves expressly to the essence of technology , we find ourselves unexpectedly taken into a freeing claim . '
What this entails is a more complex relationship to technology than either techno-optimists or techno-pessimists tend to allow . ''
The notion of appropriate technology was developed in the 20th century by thinkers such as E. F. Schumacher and Jacques Ellul to describe situations where it was not desirable to use very new technologies or those that required access to some centralized infrastructure or parts or skills imported from elsewhere .
The ecovillage movement emerged in part due to this concern .
These include primates such as chimpanzees , some dolphin communities , and crows .
Theories of technology often attempt to predict the future of technology based on the high technology and science of the time .
The term `` technology '' rose to prominence in the 20th century in connection with the Second Industrial Revolution .
The term 's meanings changed in the early 20th century when American social scientists , beginning with Thorstein Veblen , translated ideas from the German concept of Technik into `` technology . ''
In German and other European languages , a distinction exists between technik and technologie that is absent in English , which usually translates both terms as `` technology . ''
By the 1930s , `` technology '' referred not only to the study of the industrial arts but to the industrial arts themselves .
An American inventor , Charles Francis Jenkins , also pioneered the television .
He published an article on `` Motion Pictures by Wireless '' in 1913 , but it was not until December 1923 that he transmitted moving silhouette images for witnesses ; and it was on 13 June 1925 , that he publicly demonstrated synchronized transmission of silhouette pictures .
In 1925 Jenkins used the Nipkow disk and transmitted the silhouette image of a toy windmill in motion , over a distance of five miles , from a naval radio station in Maryland to his laboratory in Washington , D.C. , using a lensed disk scanner with a 48-line resolution .
He was granted U.S. Patent No. 1,544,156 -LRB- Transmitting Pictures over Wireless -RRB- on 30 June 1925 -LRB- filed 13 March 1922 -RRB- .
In 1897 , English physicist J. J. Thomson was able , in his three famous experiments , to deflect cathode rays , a fundamental function of the modern cathode ray tube -LRB- CRT -RRB- .
The earliest version of the CRT was invented by the German physicist Ferdinand Braun in 1897 and is also known as the `` Braun '' tube .
In 1906 the Germans Max Dieckmann and Gustav Glage produced raster images for the first time in a CRT .
In 1907 , Russian scientist Boris Rosing used a CRT in the receiving end of an experimental video signal to form a picture .
In 1908 Alan Archibald Campbell-Swinton , fellow of the Royal Society -LRB- UK -RRB- , published a letter in the scientific journal Nature in which he described how `` distant electric vision '' could be achieved by using a cathode ray tube , or Braun tube , as both a transmitting and receiving device , He expanded on his vision in a speech given in London in 1911 and reported in The Times and the Journal of the Röntgen Society .
In a letter to Nature published in October 1926 , Campbell-Swinton also announced the results of some `` not very successful experiments '' he had conducted with G. M. Minchin and J. C. M. Stanton .
They had attempted to generate an electrical signal by projecting an image onto a selenium-coated metal plate that was simultaneously scanned by a cathode ray beam .
These experiments were conducted before March 1914 , when Minchin died , but they were later repeated by two different teams in 1937 , by H. Miller and J. W. Strange from EMI , and by H. Iams and A. Rose from RCA .
Both teams succeeded in transmitting `` very faint '' images with the original Campbell-Swinton 's selenium-coated plate .
Although others had experimented with using a cathode ray tube as a receiver , the concept of using one as a transmitter was novel .
The first cathode ray tube to use a hot cathode was developed by John B. Johnson -LRB- who gave his name to the term Johnson noise -RRB- and Harry Weiner Weinhart of Western Electric , and became a commercial product in 1922 .
In 1926 , Hungarian engineer Kálmán Tihanyi designed a television system utilizing fully electronic scanning and display elements and employing the principle of `` charge storage '' within the scanning -LRB- or `` camera '' -RRB- tube .
The problem of low sensitivity to light resulting in low electrical output from transmitting or `` camera '' tubes would be solved with the introduction of charge-storage technology by Kálmán Tihanyi beginning in 1924 .
His solution was a camera tube that accumulated and stored electrical charges -LRB- `` photoelectrons '' -RRB- within the tube throughout each scanning cycle .
The device was first described in a patent application he filed in Hungary in March 1926 for a television system he dubbed `` Radioskop '' .
After further refinements included in a 1928 patent application , Tihanyi 's patent was declared void in Great Britain in 1930 , so he applied for patents in the United States .
Although his breakthrough would be incorporated into the design of RCA 's `` iconoscope '' in 1931 , the U.S. patent for Tihanyi 's transmitting tube would not be granted until May 1939 .
The patent for his receiving tube had been granted the previous October .
Both patents had been purchased by RCA prior to their approval .
Charge storage remains a basic principle in the design of imaging devices for television to the present day .
On 25 December 1926 , at Hamamatsu Industrial High School in Japan , Japanese inventor Kenjiro Takayanagi demonstrated a TV system with a 40-line resolution that employed a CRT display .
Cable television is a system of broadcasting television programming to paying subscribers via radio frequency -LRB- RF -RRB- signals transmitted through coaxial cables or light pulses through fiber-optic cables .
This contrasts with traditional terrestrial television , in which the television signal is transmitted over the air by radio waves and received by a television antenna attached to the television .
In the 2000s , FM radio programming , high-speed Internet , telephone service , and similar non-television services may also be provided through these cables .
The abbreviation CATV is often used for cable television .
It originally stood for Community Access Television or Community Antenna Television , from cable television 's origins in 1948 : in areas where over-the-air reception was limited by distance from transmitters or mountainous terrain , large `` community antennas '' were constructed , and cable was run from them to individual homes .
The origins of cable broadcasting are even older as radio programming was distributed by cable in some European cities as far back as 1924 .
Earlier cable television was analog , but since the 2000s all cable operators have switched to , or are in the process of switching to , digital cable television .
Television services in some countries may be funded by a television licence or a form of taxation , which means that advertising plays a lesser role or no role at all .
For example , some channels may carry no advertising at all and some very little , including :
The BBC carries no television advertising on its UK channels and is funded by an annual television licence paid by premises receiving live TV broadcasts .
Currently , it is estimated that approximately 26.8 million UK private domestic households own televisions , with approximately 25 million TV licences in all premises in force as of 2010 .
This television license fee is set by the government , but the BBC is not answerable to or controlled by the government .
For coherence theories in general , truth requires a proper fit of elements within a whole system .
Very often , though , coherence is taken to imply something more than simple logical consistency ; often there is a demand that the propositions in a coherent system lend mutual inferential support to each other .
A pervasive tenet of coherence theories is the idea that truth is primarily a property of whole systems of propositions , and can be ascribed to individual propositions only according to their coherence with the whole .
Among the assortment of perspectives commonly regarded as coherence theory , theorists differ on the question of whether coherence entails many possible true systems of thought or only a single absolute system .
Bertrand Russell is credited with noticing the existence of such paradoxes even in the best symbolic formations of mathematics in his day , in particular the paradox that came to be named after him , Russell 's paradox .
Russell and Whitehead attempted to solve these problems in Principia Mathematica by putting statements into a hierarchy of types , wherein a statement can not refer to itself , but only to statements lower in the hierarchy .
This in turn led to new orders of difficulty regarding the precise natures of types and the structures of conceptually possible type systems that have yet to be resolved to this day .
In Hinduism , Truth is defined as `` unchangeable '' , `` that which has no distortion '' , `` that which is beyond distinctions of time , space , and person '' , `` that which pervades the universe in all its constancy '' .
The human body , therefore is not completely true as it changes with time , for example .
There are many references , properties and explanations of truth by Hindu sages that explain varied facets of truth , such as the national motto of India : `` Satyameva jayate '' -LRB- Truth alone wins -RRB- , as well as `` Satyam muktaye '' -LRB- Truth liberates -RRB- , `` Satya ' is ` Parahit ` artham ' va'unmanaso yatha ` rthatvam ' satyam '' -LRB- Satya is the benevolent use of words and the mind for the welfare of others or in other words responsibilities is truth too -RRB- , `` When one is firmly established in speaking truth , the fruits of action become subservient to him -LRB- patanjali yogasutras , sutra number 2.36 -RRB- , `` The face of truth is covered by a golden bowl .
Unveil it , O Pusan -LRB- Sun -RRB- , so that I who have truth as my duty -LRB- satyadharma -RRB- may see it ! ''
Combined with other words , satya acts as modifier , like `` ultra '' or `` highest , '' or more literally `` truest , '' connoting purity and excellence .
This passage makes use of his distinction between nominal and real definitions .
A nominal definition explains the meaning of a linguistic expression .
A real definition describes the essence of certain objects and enable us to determine whether any given item falls within the definition .
Kant holds that the definition of truth is merely nominal and , therefore , we can not employ it to establish which judgements are true .
According to Kant , the ancient skeptics were critical of the logicians for holding that , by means of a merely nominal definition of truth , they can establish which judgements are true .
However , the substantive theories are not universally accepted .
More recently developed `` deflationary '' or `` minimalist '' theories of truth have emerged as competitors to the older substantive theories .
Minimalist reasoning realises truth as a label utilised in general discourse to express agreement , to stress claims , or to form general assumptions .
For example , in an engine , a fixed boundary means the piston is locked at its position , within which a constant volume process might occur .
If the piston is allowed to move that boundary is movable while the cylinder and cylinder head boundaries are fixed .
In the case of a jet engine , a fixed imaginary boundary might be assumed at the intake of the engine , fixed boundaries along the surface of the case and a second fixed imaginary boundary across the exhaust nozzle .
Often , when analysing a dynamic thermodynamic process , the simplifying assumption is made that each intermediate state in the process is at equilibrium , producing thermodynamic processes which develop so slowly as to allow each intermediate step to be an equilibrium state and are said to be reversible processes .
As the result of an approach by Royal Naval Air Service officers who had been operating armoured cars on the Western Front , the First Lord of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill formed the Landships Committee , on 20 February 1915 .
The Director of Naval Construction for the Royal Navy , Eustace Tennyson d'Eyncourt , was appointed to head the Committee in view of his experience with the engineering methods it was felt might be required ; the two other members were naval officers , and a number of industrialists were engaged as consultants .
So many played a part in its long and complicated development that it is not possible to name any individual as the sole inventor of the tank .
Germany fielded very few tanks during World War I , and started development only after encountering British tanks on the Somme .
The A7V , the only type made , was introduced in March 1918 .
with just 20 being produced during the war .
The first tank versus tank action took place on 24 April 1918 at the Second Battle of Villers-Bretonneux , France , when three British Mark IVs met three German A7Vs .
Captured British Mk IVs formed the bulk of Germany 's tank forces during World War I ; about 35 were in service at any one time .
Plans to expand the tank programme were under way when the War ended .
During the Cold War , tension between the Warsaw Pact countries and North Atlantic Treaty Organisation -LRB- NATO -RRB- countries created an arms race that ensured that tank development proceeded largely as it had during World War II .
The essence of tank designs during the Cold War had been hammered out in the closing stages of World War II .
Tank design during the Cold War built on this foundation and included improvements to fire control , gyroscopic gun stabilisation , communications -LRB- primarily radio -RRB- and crew comfort and saw the introduction of laser rangefinders and infrared night vision equipment .
Armour technology progressed in an ongoing race against improvements in anti-tank weapons , especially antitank guided missiles like the TOW .
However , as effective and advanced as armour plating has become , tank survivability against newer-generation tandem-warhead anti-tank missiles is a concern for military planners .
For example , the RPG-29 from 1980s is able to penetrate the frontal hull armour of the Challenger II and also managed to damage a M1 Abrams .
As well , even tanks with advanced armour plating can have their tracks damaged by RPGs , which may render them immobile .
In the absence of combat engineers , most tanks are limited to fording rivers .
The typical fording depth for MBTs is approximately 1 m -LRB- 3.3 ft -RRB- , being limited by the height of the engine air intake and driver 's position .
Modern tanks such as the Russian T-90 and the German Leopard 1 and Leopard 2 tanks can ford to a depth of 3 to 4 m -LRB- 9.8 to 13.1 ft -RRB- when properly prepared and equipped with a snorkel to supply air for the crew and engine .
Tank crews usually have a negative reaction towards deep fording but it adds considerable scope for surprise and tactical flexibility in water crossing operations by opening new and unexpected avenues of attack .
Modern standard Turkish is based on the dialect of Istanbul .
Dialectal variation persists , in spite of the levelling influence of the standard used in mass media and the Turkish education system since the 1930s .
Academically , researchers from Turkey often refer to Turkish dialects as ağız or şive , leading to an ambiguity with the linguistic concept of accent , which is also covered with these words .
Projects investigating Turkish dialects are being carried out by several universities , as well as a dedicated work group of the Turkish Language Association .
In native Turkic words , the sounds -LSB- c -RSB- , -LSB- ɟ -RSB- , and -LSB- l -RSB- are in complementary distribution with -LSB- k -RSB- , -LSB- ɡ -RSB- , and -LSB- ɫ -RSB- ; the former set occurs adjacent to front vowels and the latter adjacent to back vowels .
In such words , -LSB- c -RSB- , -LSB- ɟ -RSB- , and -LSB- l -RSB- often occur with back vowels : some examples are given below .
There is a third way of linking the nouns where both nouns take no suffixes -LRB- takısız tamlama -RRB- .
However , in this case the first noun acts as an adjective , e.g. Demir kapı -LRB- iron gate -RRB- , elma yanak -LRB- `` apple cheek '' , i.e. red cheek -RRB- , kömür göz -LRB- `` coal eye '' , i.e. black eye -RRB- :
The earliest known Turkic inscriptions are the three monumental Orkhon inscriptions found in modern Mongolia .
Erected in honour of the prince Kul Tigin and his brother Emperor Bilge Khagan , and dating back to some time between 732 and 735 , as well as Bayn Tsokto inscriptions erected by Tonyukuk , the commander in chief between 720 and 725 , they constitute important earliest records .
After the discovery and excavation of these monuments and associated stone slabs by Russian archaeologists in the wider area surrounding the Orkhon Valley between 1889 and 1893 , it became established that the language on the inscriptions was the Old Turkic language written using the Old Turkic alphabet , which has also been referred to as `` Turkic runes '' or `` runiform '' due to a superficial similarity to the Germanic runic alphabets .
Although originally designed for simple voice communications , convergence has enabled most modern cell phones to have many additional capabilities .
They may be able to record spoken messages , send and receive text messages , take and display photographs or video , play music or games , surf the Internet , do road navigation or immerse the user in virtual reality .
Since 1999 , the trend for mobile phones is smartphones that integrate all mobile communication and computing needs .
In a grounded-emitter transistor circuit , such as the light-switch circuit shown , as the base voltage rises , the emitter and collector currents rise exponentially .
The collector voltage drops because of reduced resistance from collector to emitter .
If the voltage difference between the collector and emitter were zero -LRB- or near zero -RRB- , the collector current would be limited only by the load resistance -LRB- light bulb -RRB- and the supply voltage .
This is called saturation because current is flowing from collector to emitter freely .
In a FET , the drain-to-source current flows via a conducting channel that connects the source region to the drain region .
The conductivity is varied by the electric field that is produced when a voltage is applied between the gate and source terminals ; hence the current flowing between the drain and source is controlled by the voltage applied between the gate and source .
As the gate -- source voltage -LRB- VGS -RRB- is increased , the drain -- source current -LRB- IDS -RRB- increases exponentially for VGS below threshold , and then at a roughly quadratic rate -LRB- IGS ∝ -LRB- VGS − VT -RRB- 2 -RRB- -LRB- where VT is the threshold voltage at which drain current begins -RRB- in the `` space-charge-limited '' region above threshold .
A quadratic behavior is not observed in modern devices , for example , at the 65 nm technology node .
Since devices are second-sourced , a manufacturer 's prefix -LRB- like `` MPF '' in MPF102 , which originally would denote a Motorola FET -RRB- now is an unreliable indicator of who made the device .
Some proprietary naming schemes adopt parts of other naming schemes , for example a PN2222A is a -LRB- possibly Fairchild Semiconductor -RRB- 2N2222A in a plastic case -LRB- but a PN108 is a plastic version of a BC108 , not a 2N108 , while the PN100 is unrelated to other xx100 devices -RRB- .
The first BJTs were made from germanium -LRB- Ge -RRB- .
Silicon -LRB- Si -RRB- types currently predominate but certain advanced microwave and high-performance versions now employ the compound semiconductor material gallium arsenide -LRB- GaAs -RRB- and the semiconductor alloy silicon germanium -LRB- SiGe -RRB- .
Single element semiconductor material -LRB- Ge and Si -RRB- is described as elemental .
The minor nations attended a weekly `` Plenary Conference '' that discussed issues in a general forum , but made no decisions .
These members formed over 50 commissions that made various recommendations , many of which were incorporated into the final treaty .
An acute exacerbation of COPD is defined as increased shortness of breath , increased sputum production , a change in the color of the sputum from clear to green or yellow , or an increase in cough in someone with COPD .
Crackles may also be heard over the lungs on examination with a stethoscope .
Typically these exposures must occur over several decades before symptoms develop .
A person 's genetic makeup also affects the risk .
A number of other factors are less closely linked to COPD .
The risk is greater in those who are poor , although it is not clear if this is due to poverty itself or other risk factors associated with poverty , such as air pollution and malnutrition .
Birth factors such as low birth weight may also play a role as do a number of infectious diseases including HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis .
Respiratory infections such as pneumonia do not appear to increase the risk of COPD , at least in adults .
The diagnosis of COPD should be considered in anyone over the age of 35 to 40 who has shortness of breath , a chronic cough , sputum production , or frequent winter colds and a history of exposure to risk factors for the disease .
Spirometry is then used to confirm the diagnosis .
Some smokers can achieve long-term smoking cessation through willpower alone .
Smoking , however , is highly addictive , and many smokers need further support .
Combining smoking cessation medication with behavioural therapy is more than two times as likely to be effective in helping people with COPD stop smoking , compared with behavioural therapy alone .
This may be achieved by public policy efforts , cultural changes , and personal involvement .
Proper stoves may improve indoor air quality by 85 % .
Between 1990 and 2010 the number of deaths from COPD decreased slightly from 3.1 million to 2.9 million and became the fourth leading cause of death .
In 2012 it became the third leading cause as the number of deaths rose again to 3.1 million .
In some countries , mortality has decreased in men but increased in women .
COPD is more common in older people ; it affects 34 -- 200 out of 1000 people older than 65 years , depending on the population under review .
Roflumilast , cilomilast , and phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors act as a bronchodilator and as an anti-inflammatory .
They show promise in decreasing the rate of exacerbations , but do not appear to change a persons quality of life .
Roflumilast and cilomilast may be associated with side effects such as gastrointestinal issues and weight loss .
Unemployment and similar taxes are often imposed on employers based on total payroll .
These taxes may be imposed in both the country and sub-country levels .
Sales taxes are levied when a commodity is sold to its final consumer .
Retail organizations contend that such taxes discourage retail sales .
People with higher incomes spend a lower proportion of them , so a flat-rate sales tax will tend to be regressive .
It is therefore common to exempt food , utilities and other necessities from sales taxes , since poor people spend a higher proportion of their incomes on these commodities , so such exemptions make the tax more progressive .
This is the classic `` You pay for what you spend '' tax , as only those who spend money on non-exempt -LRB- i.e. luxury -RRB- items pay the tax .
To show this relationship , suppose that the market price of a product is $ 1.00 , and that a $ 0.50 tax is imposed on the product that , by law , is to be collected from the seller .
If the product has an elastic demand , a greater portion of the tax will be absorbed by the seller .
This is because goods with elastic demand cause a large decline in quantity demanded for a small increase in price .
Therefore , in order to stabilize sales , the seller absorbs more of the additional tax burden .
For example , the seller might drop the price of the product to $ 0.70 so that , after adding in the tax , the buyer pays a total of $ 1.20 , or $ 0.20 more than he did before the $ 0.50 tax was imposed .
In this example , the buyer has paid $ 0.20 of the $ 0.50 tax -LRB- in the form of a post-tax price -RRB- and the seller has paid the remaining $ 0.30 -LRB- in the form of a lower pre-tax price -RRB- .
However , in a quarter of African countries Overseas Development Assistance does exceed tax collection , with these more likely to be non-resource-rich countries .
This suggests countries making most progress replacing aid with tax revenue tend to be those benefiting disproportionately from rising prices of energy and commodities .
In many low-income countries , the majority of revenue is collected from a narrow tax base , sometimes because of a limited range of taxable economic activities .
There is therefore dependence on few taxpayers , often multinationals , that can exacerbate the revenue challenge by minimising their tax liability , in some cases abusing a lack of capacity in revenue authorities , sometimes through transfer pricing abuse .
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics reports that estimates of revenue-maximizing tax rates have varied widely , with a mid-range of around 70 % .
Chung-ying Cheng , a Chinese philosopher , views Taoism as a religion that has been embedded into Chinese history and tradition .
`` Whether Confucianism , Daoism , or later Chinese Buddhism , they all fall into this pattern of thinking and organizing and in this sense remain religious , even though individually and intellectually they also assume forms of philosophy and practical wisdom . ''
Chung-ying Cheng also noted that the Daoist view of heaven flows mainly from `` observation and meditation , -LSB- though -RSB- the teaching of the way -LRB- dao -RRB- can also include the way of heaven independently of human nature '' .
In Chinese history , the three religions of Buddhism , Daoism and Confucianism stand on their own independent views , and yet are `` involved in a process of attempting to find harmonization and convergence among themselves , so that we can speak of a ` unity of three religious teaching ' -LRB- sanjiao heyi -RRB- '' .
Taoism tends to emphasize various themes of the I Ching , the Tao Te Ching and Zhuangzi , such as naturalness , spontaneity , simplicity , detachment from desires , and most important of all , wu wei .
However , the concepts of those keystone texts can not be equated with Taoism as a whole .
Taoist temples may fly square or triangular flags .
They typically feature mystical writing or diagrams and are intended to fulfill various functions including providing guidance for the spirits of the dead , bringing good fortune , increasing life span , etc. .
These are lively affairs which invariably involve firecrackers and flower-covered floats broadcasting traditional music .
They also variously include lion dances and dragon dances ; human-occupied puppets -LRB- often of the `` Seventh Lord '' and `` Eighth Lord '' -RRB- ; tongji -LRB- 童乩 `` spirit-medium ; shaman '' -RRB- who cut their skin with knives ; Bajiajiang , which are Kungfu-practicing honor guards in demonic makeup ; and palanquins carrying god-images .
The various participants are not considered performers , but rather possessed by the gods and spirits in question .
Most Chinese people and many others have been influenced in some way by Taoist traditions .
Since the creation of the People 's Republic of China , its government has encouraged a revival of Taoist traditions in codified settings .
In 1956 , the Chinese Taoist Association was formed to administer the activities of all registered Taoist orders , and received official approval in 1957 .
The headquarters of the association are at the Baiyunguan , or White Cloud Temple of Beijing , belonging to the Longmen branch of Quanzhen Taoism .
Since 1980 , many Taoist monasteries and temples have been reopened or rebuilt , both belonging to the Zhengyi or Quanzhen schools , and clergy ordination has been resumed .
The witch hunts expanded into Baden following its reconquest by Tilly , while the Imperial victory in the Palatinate opened the way for their eventual spread to the Rhineland .
The Rhenish electorates of Mainz and Trier both witnessed mass burnings of suspected witches during this time .
In Cologne , the territory 's Prince-Archbishop , Ferdinand of Bavaria , presided over a particularly infamous series of witchcraft trials that included the controversial prosecution of Katharina Henot , who was burned at the stake in 1627 .
During this time , the witch hunts also continued their unchecked growth , as new and increased incidents of alleged witchcraft began surfacing in the territories of Westphalia .
The Thirty Years ' War rearranged the European power structure .
While Spain was fighting in France , Portugal -- which had been under personal union with Spain for 60 years -- acclaimed John IV of Braganza as king in 1640 , and the House of Braganza became the new dynasty of Portugal .
Meanwhile , Spain was forced to accept the independence of the Dutch Republic in 1648 , ending the Eighty Years ' War .
Bourbon France challenged Habsburg Spain 's supremacy in the Franco-Spanish War -LRB- 1635 -- 59 -RRB- , gaining definitive ascendancy in the War of Devolution -LRB- 1667 -- 68 -RRB- , and the Franco-Dutch War -LRB- 1672 -- 78 -RRB- , under the leadership of Louis XIV .
The book is based on the author 's first-hand experience .
An opera adaptation by the same name was produced in the 1930s , written by Karl Amadeus Hartmann .
In The Hangman 's Daughter by Oliver Pötzsch , the protagonist , hangman Jakob Kuisl , and other prominent characters have served in a General Tylli 's army and participated in the sacking of the city of Magdeburg during the Thirty Years ' War .
`` The Great War '' and Swedish incursion into north-central Germany are frequently referenced .
The Cavalier Club -LRB- 2015 -RRB- by Stanley Goldyn begins with the siege of Pilsen in 1618 and features an English lieutenant .
In the United States , the term consist is used to describe the group of rail vehicles which make up a train .
When referring to motive power , consist refers to the group of locomotives powering the train .
Similarly , the term trainset refers to a group of rolling stock that is permanently or semi-permanently coupled together to form a unified set of equipment -LRB- the term is most often applied to passenger train configurations -RRB- .
In some countries `` piggy-back '' trains or rolling highways are used : In the latter case trucks can drive straight onto the train and drive off again when the end destination is reached .
A system like this is used through the Channel Tunnel between England and France , and for the trans-Alpine service between France and Italy -LRB- this service uses Modalohr road trailer carriers -RRB- .
`` Piggy-back '' trains are the fastest growing type of freight trains in the United States , where they are also known as `` trailer on flatcar '' or TOFC trains .
An alternative type of `` inter-modal '' vehicle , known as a roadrailer , is designed to be physically attached to the train .
The original trailers were fitted with two sets of wheels -- one set flanged , for the trailer to run connected to other such trailers as a rail vehicle in a train ; and one set tyred , for use as the semi-trailer of a road vehicle .
More modern trailers have only road wheels and are designed to be carried on specially adapted bogies -LRB- trucks -RRB- when moving on rails .
It divides every 16 to 20 hours , which is an extremely slow rate compared with other bacteria , which usually divide in less than an hour .
If a Gram stain is performed , MTB either stains very weakly `` Gram-positive '' or does not retain dye as a result of the high lipid and mycolic acid content of its cell wall .
MTB can withstand weak disinfectants and survive in a dry state for weeks .
In nature , the bacterium can grow only within the cells of a host organism , but M. tuberculosis can be cultured in the laboratory .
In children it decreases the risk of getting the infection by 20 % and the risk of infection turning into disease by nearly 60 % .
Primary resistance occurs when a person becomes infected with a resistant strain of TB .
A person with fully susceptible MTB may develop secondary -LRB- acquired -RRB- resistance during therapy because of inadequate treatment , not taking the prescribed regimen appropriately -LRB- lack of compliance -RRB- , or using low-quality medication .
Drug-resistant TB is a serious public health issue in many developing countries , as its treatment is longer and requires more expensive drugs .
MDR-TB is defined as resistance to the two most effective first-line TB drugs : rifampicin and isoniazid .
Totally drug-resistant TB is resistant to all currently used drugs .
It was first observed in 2003 in Italy , but not widely reported until 2012 , and has also been found in Iran and India .
Bedaquiline is tentatively supported for use in multiple drug-resistant TB .
In Europe , rates of tuberculosis began to rise in the early 1600s to a peak level in the 1800s , when it caused nearly 25 % of all deaths .
By the 1950s , mortality in Europe had decreased about 90 % .
Improvements in sanitation , vaccination , and other public health measures began significantly reducing rates of tuberculosis even before the arrival of streptomycin and other antibiotics , although the disease remained a significant threat .
In 1946 , the development of the antibiotic streptomycin made effective treatment and cure of TB a reality .
Prior to the introduction of this medication , the only treatment was surgical intervention , including the `` pneumothorax technique '' , which involved collapsing an infected lung to `` rest '' it and allow tuberculous lesions to heal .
Scientific academies and societies grew out of the Scientific Revolution as the creators of scientific knowledge in contrast to the scholasticism of the university .
During the Enlightenment , some societies created or retained links to universities .
However , contemporary sources distinguished universities from scientific societies by claiming that the university 's utility was in the transmission of knowledge , while societies functioned to create knowledge .
As the role of universities in institutionalized science began to diminish , learned societies became the cornerstone of organized science .
Official scientific societies were chartered by the state in order to provide technical expertise .
Most societies were granted permission to oversee their own publications , control the election of new members , and the administration of the society .
After 1700 , a tremendous number of official academies and societies were founded in Europe , and by 1789 there were over seventy official scientific societies .
In reference to this growth , Bernard de Fontenelle coined the term `` the Age of Academies '' to describe the 18th century .
The most famous natural right formulation comes from John Locke in his Second Treatise , when he introduces the state of nature .
For Locke the law of nature is grounded on mutual security , or the idea that one can not infringe on another 's natural rights , as every man is equal and has the same inalienable rights .
These natural rights include perfect equality and freedom , and the right to preserve life and property .
Locke also argued against slavery on the basis that enslaving yourself goes against the law of nature ; you can not surrender your own rights , your freedom is absolute and no one can take it from you .
Additionally , Locke argues that one person can not enslave another because it is morally reprehensible , although he introduces a caveat by saying that enslavement of a lawful captive in time of war would not go against one 's natural rights .
The Age of Enlightenment was preceded by and closely associated with the scientific revolution .
The major figures of the Enlightenment included Cesare Beccaria , Voltaire , Denis Diderot , Jean-Jacques Rousseau , David Hume , Adam Smith , and Immanuel Kant .
Some European rulers , including Catherine II of Russia , Joseph II of Austria and Frederick II of Prussia , tried to apply Enlightenment thought on religious and political tolerance , which became known as enlightened absolutism .
Benjamin Franklin visited Europe repeatedly and contributed actively to the scientific and political debates there and brought the newest ideas back to Philadelphia .
Thomas Jefferson closely followed European ideas and later incorporated some of the ideals of the Enlightenment into the Declaration of Independence -LRB- 1776 -RRB- .
In contrast to the intellectual historiographical approach of the Enlightenment , which examines the various currents or discourses of intellectual thought within the European context during the 17th and 18th centuries , the cultural -LRB- or social -RRB- approach examines the changes that occurred in European society and culture .
In the midst of all the governments that decide the fate of men ; in the bosom of so many states , the majority of them despotic ... there exists a certain realm which holds sway only over the mind ... that we honour with the name Republic , because it preserves a measure of independence , and because it is almost its essence to be free .
The massive work was arranged according to a `` tree of knowledge . ''
The tree reflected the marked division between the arts and sciences , which was largely a result of the rise of empiricism .
Both areas of knowledge were united by philosophy , or the trunk of the tree of knowledge .
The Enlightenment 's desacrilization of religion was pronounced in the tree 's design , particularly where theology accounted for a peripheral branch , with black magic as a close neighbour .
As the Encyclopédie gained popularity , it was published in quarto and octavo editions after 1777 .
The quarto and octavo editions were much less expensive than previous editions , making the Encyclopédie more accessible to the non-elite .
Robert Darnton estimates that there were approximately 25 000 copies of the Encyclopédie in circulation throughout France and Europe before the French Revolution .
The extensive , yet affordable encyclopedia came to represent the transmission of Enlightenment and scientific education to an expanding audience .
Lincoln 's declared philosophy on court nominations was that `` we can not ask a man what he will do , and if we should , and he should answer us , we should despise him for it .
Lincoln made five appointments to the United States Supreme Court .
Noah Haynes Swayne , nominated January 21 , 1862 and appointed January 24 , 1862 , was chosen as an anti-slavery lawyer who was committed to the Union .
Samuel Freeman Miller , nominated and appointed on July 16 , 1862 , supported Lincoln in the 1860 election and was an avowed abolitionist .
David Davis , Lincoln 's campaign manager in 1860 , nominated December 1 , 1862 and appointed December 8 , 1862 , had also served as a judge in Lincoln 's Illinois court circuit .
Stephen Johnson Field , a previous California Supreme Court justice , was nominated March 6 , 1863 and appointed March 10 , 1863 , and provided geographic balance , as well as political balance to the court as a Democrat .
Finally , Lincoln 's Treasury Secretary , Salmon P. Chase , was nominated as Chief Justice , and appointed the same day , on December 6 , 1864 .
Lincoln believed Chase was an able jurist , would support Reconstruction legislation , and that his appointment united the Republican Party .
In the 1840s , Lincoln subscribed to the Doctrine of Necessity , a belief that asserted the human mind was controlled by some higher power .
In the 1850s , Lincoln believed in `` providence '' in a general way , and rarely used the language or imagery of the evangelicals ; he regarded the republicanism of the Founding Fathers with an almost religious reverence .
When he suffered the death of his son Edward , Lincoln more frequently expressed a need to depend on God .
The death of his son Willie in February 1862 may have caused Lincoln to look toward religion for answers and solace .
After Willie 's death , Lincoln considered why , from a divine standpoint , the severity of the war was necessary .
He wrote at this time that God `` could have either saved or destroyed the Union without a human contest .
On the day Lincoln was assassinated , he reportedly told his wife he desired to visit the Holy Land .
Barry Schwartz , a sociologist who has examined America 's cultural memory , argues that in the 1930s and 1940s , the memory of Abraham Lincoln was practically sacred and provided the nation with `` a moral symbol inspiring and guiding American life '' .
During the Great Depression , he argues , Lincoln served `` as a means for seeing the world 's disappointments , for making its sufferings not so much explicable as meaningful '' .
Franklin D. Roosevelt , preparing America for war , used the words of the Civil War president to clarify the threat posed by Germany and Japan .
Americans asked , `` What would Lincoln do ? ''
However , Schwartz also finds that since World War II , Lincoln 's symbolic power has lost relevance , and this `` fading hero is symptomatic of fading confidence in national greatness '' .
He suggested that postmodernism and multiculturalism have diluted greatness as a concept .
In 1832 , at age 23 , Lincoln and a partner bought a small general store on credit in New Salem , Illinois .
Although the economy was booming in the region , the business struggled and Lincoln eventually sold his share .
Eric Foner -LRB- 2010 -RRB- contrasts the abolitionists and anti-slavery Radical Republicans of the Northeast who saw slavery as a sin , with the conservative Republicans who thought it was bad because it hurt white people and blocked progress .
Foner argues that Lincoln was a moderate in the middle , opposing slavery primarily because it violated the republicanism principles of the Founding Fathers , especially the equality of all men and democratic self-government as expressed in the Declaration of Independence .
Nationally , the Whigs had been irreparably split by the Kansas -- Nebraska Act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue .
Lincoln wrote , `` I think I am a Whig , but others say there are no Whigs , and that I am an abolitionist -LSB- ... -RSB- I do no more than oppose the extension of slavery . ''
Drawing on the antislavery portion of the Whig Party , and combining Free Soil , Liberty , and antislavery Democratic Party members , the new Republican Party formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery .
Lincoln was one of those instrumental in forging the shape of the new party ; at the 1856 Republican National Convention , he placed second in the contest to become its candidate for vice president .
Historian Donald described the speech as a `` superb political move for an unannounced candidate , to appear in one rival 's -LRB- William H. Seward -RRB- own state at an event sponsored by the second rival 's -LRB- Salmon P. Chase -RRB- loyalists , while not mentioning either by name during its delivery '' .
The Wide Awake Parade was formed in 1860 by Republicans in the Northern states to help nominate Abraham Lincoln as the President of the United States .
As Lincoln 's ideas of abolishing slavery grew , so did his supporters .
People of the Northern states knew the Southern states would vote against Lincoln because of his ideas of anti-slavery and took action to rally supporters for Lincoln .
As Lincoln 's election became evident , secessionists made clear their intent to leave the Union before he took office the next March .
On December 20 , 1860 , South Carolina took the lead by adopting an ordinance of secession ; by February 1 , 1861 , Florida , Mississippi , Alabama , Georgia , Louisiana , and Texas followed .
Six of these states then adopted a constitution and declared themselves to be a sovereign nation , the Confederate States of America .
The upper South and border states -LRB- Delaware , Maryland , Virginia , North Carolina , Tennessee , Kentucky , Missouri , and Arkansas -RRB- listened to , but initially rejected , the secessionist appeal .
President Buchanan and President-elect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy , declaring secession illegal .
The Confederacy selected Jefferson Davis as its provisional President on February 9 , 1861 .
Burnside , against the advice of the president , prematurely launched an offensive across the Rappahannock River and was stunningly defeated by Lee at Fredericksburg in December .
Not only had Burnside been defeated on the battlefield , but his soldiers were disgruntled and undisciplined .
Desertions during 1863 were in the thousands and they increased after Fredericksburg .
Lincoln brought in Joseph Hooker , despite his record of loose talk about the need for a military dictatorship .
The mid-term elections in 1862 brought the Republicans severe losses due to sharp disfavor with the administration over its failure to deliver a speedy end to the war , as well as rising inflation , new high taxes , rumors of corruption , the suspension of habeas corpus , the military draft law , and fears that freed slaves would undermine the labor market .
The Emancipation Proclamation announced in September gained votes for the Republicans in the rural areas of New England and the upper Midwest , but it lost votes in the cities and the lower Midwest .
Hooker was routed by Lee at the Battle of Chancellorsville in May , but continued to command his troops for some weeks .
He ignored Lincoln 's order to divide his troops , and possibly force Lee to do the same in Harper 's Ferry , and tendered his resignation , which Lincoln accepted .
He was replaced by George Meade , who followed Lee into Pennsylvania for the Gettysburg Campaign , which was a victory for the Union , though Lee 's army avoided capture .
At the same time , after initial setbacks , Grant laid siege to Vicksburg and the Union navy attained some success in Charleston harbor .
After the Battle of Gettysburg , Lincoln clearly understood that his military decisions would be more effectively carried out by conveying his orders through his War Secretary or his general-in-chief on to his generals , who resented his civilian interference with their own plans .
Sun-cured tobacco dries uncovered in the sun .
This method is used in Turkey , Greece , and other Mediterranean countries to produce oriental tobacco .
Sun-cured tobacco is low in sugar and nicotine and is used in cigarettes .
Tobacco is consumed in many forms and through a number of different methods .
The harms caused by inhalation of poisonous chemicals such as Carbon Monoxide in tobacco smoke include diseases affecting the heart and lungs , with smoking being a major risk factor for heart attacks , strokes , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease -LRB- emphysema -RRB- , and cancer -LRB- particularly lung cancer , cancers of the larynx and mouth , and pancreatic cancers -RRB- .
Cancer is caused by inhaling carcinogenic substances present in tobacco smoke .
Inhaling secondhand tobacco smoke can cause lung cancer in nonsmoking adults .
In the United States , about 3,000 adults die each year due to lung cancer from secondhand smoke exposure .
Heart disease caused by secondhand smoke kills around 46,000 nonsmokers every year .
The first scales used routinely to measure the intensity of tsunami were the Sieberg-Ambraseys scale , used in the Mediterranean Sea and the Imamura-Iida intensity scale , used in the Pacific Ocean .
The latter scale was modified by Soloviev , who calculated the Tsunami intensity I according to the formula
Arithmetic -LRB- from the Greek ἀριθμός arithmos , `` number '' -RRB- is a branch of mathematics that consists of the study of numbers , especially the properties of the traditional operations between them -- addition , subtraction , multiplication and division .
Arithmetic is an elementary part of number theory , and number theory is considered to be one of the top-level divisions of modern mathematics , along with algebra , geometry , and analysis .
The terms arithmetic and higher arithmetic were used until the beginning of the 20th century as synonyms for number theory and are sometimes still used to refer to a wider part of number theory .
On-going normalization method in which each unit is treated separately and the problem is continuously normalized as the solution develops .
This approach , which is widely described in classical texts , is best suited for manual calculations .
An example of the ongoing normalization method as applied to addition is shown below .
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , commonly known as the United Kingdom -LRB- UK -RRB- or Britain , is a sovereign state in western Europe .
Apart from this land border , the UK is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean , with the North Sea to its east , the English Channel to its south and the Celtic Sea to its south-south-west , giving it the 12th-longest coastline in the world .
The Irish Sea lies between Great Britain and Ireland .
It is also the 21st-most populous country , with an estimated 65.1 million inhabitants .
Four Celtic languages are spoken in the UK : Welsh , Irish , Scottish Gaelic and Cornish .
All are recognised as regional or minority languages , subject to specific measures of protection and promotion under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities .
In the 2001 Census over a fifth -LRB- 21 % -RRB- of the population of Wales said they could speak Welsh , an increase from the 1991 Census -LRB- 18 % -RRB- .
In addition it is estimated that about 200,000 Welsh speakers live in England .
In the same census in Northern Ireland 167,487 people -LRB- 10.4 % -RRB- stated that they had `` some knowledge of Irish '' -LRB- see Irish language in Northern Ireland -RRB- , almost exclusively in the nationalist -LRB- mainly Catholic -RRB- population .
Over 92,000 people in Scotland -LRB- just under 2 % of the population -RRB- had some Gaelic language ability , including 72 % of those living in the Outer Hebrides .
Among emigrant-descended populations some Scottish Gaelic is still spoken in Canada -LRB- principally Nova Scotia and Cape Breton Island -RRB- , and Welsh in Patagonia , Argentina .
Between 1815 and 1930 around 11.4 million people emigrated from Britain and 7.3 million from Ireland .
Estimates show that by the end of the 20th century some 300 million people of British and Irish descent were permanently settled around the globe .
Today , at least 5.5 million UK-born people live abroad , mainly in Australia , Spain , the United States and Canada .
The early modern period saw religious conflict resulting from the Reformation and the introduction of Protestant state churches in each country .
Wales was fully incorporated into the Kingdom of England , and Ireland was constituted as a kingdom in personal union with the English crown .
In what was to become Northern Ireland , the lands of the independent Catholic Gaelic nobility were confiscated and given to Protestant settlers from England and Scotland .
The culture of the United Kingdom has been influenced by many factors including : the nation 's island status ; its history as a western liberal democracy and a major power ; as well as being a political union of four countries with each preserving elements of distinctive traditions , customs and symbolism .
As a result of the British Empire , British influence can be observed in the language , culture and legal systems of many of its former colonies including Australia , Canada , India , Ireland , New Zealand , Pakistan , South Africa and the United States .
The UK fought with France , Russia and -LRB- after 1917 -RRB- the US , against Germany and its allies in the First World War -LRB- 1914 -- 18 -RRB- .
The UK armed forces were engaged across much of the British Empire and in several regions of Europe , particularly on the Western front .
The high fatalities of trench warfare caused the loss of much of a generation of men , with lasting social effects in the nation and a great disruption in the social order .
From the late 1960s , Northern Ireland suffered communal and paramilitary violence -LRB- sometimes affecting other parts of the UK -RRB- conventionally known as the Troubles .
The relationships among the countries of the United Kingdom have changed over time .
Wales was annexed by the Kingdom of England under the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542 .
A treaty between England and Scotland resulted in 1707 in a unified Kingdom of Great Britain , which merged in 1801 with the Kingdom of Ireland to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland .
Five-sixths of Ireland seceded from the UK in 1922 , leaving the present formulation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland .
These are the remnants of the British Empire which , at its height in the 1920s , encompassed almost a quarter of the world 's land mass and was the largest empire in history .
British influence can be observed in the language , culture , and legal systems of many of its former colonies .
Wales accounts for less than a tenth of the total area of the UK , covering 20,779 square kilometres -LRB- 8,020 sq mi -RRB- .
The main population and industrial areas are in South Wales , consisting of the coastal cities of Cardiff , Swansea and Newport , and the South Wales Valleys to their north .
The highest mountains in Wales are in Snowdonia and include Snowdon -LRB- Welsh : Yr Wyddfa -RRB- which , at 1,085 metres -LRB- 3,560 ft -RRB- , is the highest peak in Wales .
The 14 , or possibly 15 , Welsh mountains over 3,000 feet -LRB- 910 metres -RRB- high are known collectively as the Welsh 3000s .
Several islands lie off the Welsh mainland , the largest of which is Anglesey -LRB- Ynys Môn -RRB- in the north-west .
Crime in England and Wales increased in the period between 1981 and 1995 , though since that peak there has been an overall fall of 66 % in recorded crime from 1995 to 2015 , according to crime statistics .
The prison population of England and Wales has increased to 86,000 , giving England and Wales the highest rate of incarceration in Western Europe at 148 per 100,000 .
Her Majesty 's Prison Service , which reports to the Ministry of Justice , manages most of the prisons within England and Wales .
The murder rate in England and Wales has stabilised in the first half of the 2010s with a murder rate around 1 per 100,000 which is half the peak in 2002 and similar to the rate in the 1980s .
More sexual offences have been reported to the police since 2002 .
Crime in Scotland fell slightly in 2014/2015 to its lowest level in 39 years in with 59 killings for a murder rate of 1.1 per 100,000 .
The combination of the UK 's relatively lax regulatory regime and London 's financial institutions providing sophisticated methods to launder proceeds from criminal activity around the world , including those from drug trade , makes the City of London a global hub for illicit finance and the UK a safe haven for the world 's major-league tax dodgers , according to research papers and reports published in the mid-2010s .
The reports on the Panama papers published in April 2016 singled out the UK as being `` at the heart of super-rich tax-avoidance network . ''
5.5 % of the population are estimated to speak languages brought to the UK as a result of relatively recent immigration .
South Asian languages , including Punjabi , Urdu , Hindi , Bengali , Tamil and Gujarati , are the largest grouping and are spoken by 2.7 % of the UK population .
According to the 2011 census , Polish has become the second-largest language spoken in England and has 546,000 speakers .
In addition to addressing global challenges , the UN has sought to improve its accountability and democratic legitimacy by engaging more with civil society and fostering a global constituency .
In an effort to enhance transparency , in 2016 the organization held its first public debate between candidates for Secretary-General .
On January 1 , 2017 , Portuguese diplomat António Guterres , who previously served as UN High Commissioner for Refugees , became the ninth Secretary-General .
Guterres has highlighted several key goals for his administration , including an emphasis on diplomacy for preventing conflicts , more effective peacekeeping efforts , and streamlining the organization to be more responsive and versatile to global needs .
The International Court of Justice is located in The Hague , while other major agencies are based in the UN offices at Geneva , Vienna , and Nairobi .
The six official languages of the UN , used in intergovernmental meetings and documents , are Arabic , Chinese , English , French , Russian , and Spanish .
Below the six organs sit , in the words of the author Linda Fasulo , `` an amazing collection of entities and organizations , some of which are actually older than the UN itself and operate with almost complete independence from it '' .
These include specialized agencies , research and training institutions , programmes and funds , and other UN entities .
The UN has six principal organs : the General Assembly -LRB- the main deliberative assembly -RRB- ; the Security Council -LRB- for deciding certain resolutions for peace and security -RRB- ; the Economic and Social Council -LRB- ECOSOC ; for promoting international economic and social co-operation and development -RRB- ; the Secretariat -LRB- for providing studies , information , and facilities needed by the UN -RRB- ; the International Court of Justice -LRB- the primary judicial organ -RRB- ; and the UN Trusteeship Council -LRB- inactive since 1994 -RRB- .
The UN 's most prominent officer is the Secretary-General , an office held by Portuguese António Guterres since 2017 .
Non-governmental organizations may be granted consultative status with ECOSOC and other agencies to participate in the UN 's work .
The Group of 77 at the UN is a loose coalition of developing nations , designed to promote its members ' collective economic interests and create an enhanced joint negotiating capacity in the UN .
Seventy-seven nations founded the organization , but by November 2013 the organization had since expanded to 133 member countries .
The group was founded 15 June 1964 by the `` Joint Declaration of the Seventy-Seven Countries '' issued at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development -LRB- UNCTAD -RRB- .
The group held its first major meeting in Algiers in 1967 , where it adopted the Charter of Algiers and established the basis for permanent institutional structures .
UV radiation was discovered in 1801 when the German physicist Johann Wilhelm Ritter observed that invisible rays just beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum darkened silver chloride-soaked paper more quickly than violet light itself .
He called them `` oxidizing rays '' to emphasize chemical reactivity and to distinguish them from `` heat rays '' , discovered the previous year at the other end of the visible spectrum .
The simpler term `` chemical rays '' was adopted shortly thereafter , and it remained popular throughout the 19th century , although there were those who held that these were an entirely different sort of radiation from light -LRB- notably John William Draper , who named them `` tithonic rays '' -RRB- .
In 1878 the effect of short-wavelength light on sterilizing bacteria was discovered .
In 1960 , the effect of ultraviolet radiation on DNA was established .
Protective eyewear is beneficial to those exposed to ultraviolet radiation .
Since light can reach the eyes from the sides , full-coverage eye protection is usually warranted if there is an increased risk of exposure , as in high-altitude mountaineering .
Mountaineers are exposed to higher-than-ordinary levels of UV radiation , both because there is less atmospheric filtering and because of reflection from snow and ice .
Ordinary , untreated eyeglasses give some protection .
Most plastic lenses give more protection than glass lenses , because , as noted above , glass is transparent to UVA and the common acrylic plastic used for lenses is less so .
Some plastic lens materials , such as polycarbonate , inherently block most UV .
Pet urine deposits in carpeting or other hard surfaces can be detected for accurate treatment and removal of mineral traces and the odor-causing bacteria that feed on proteins in urine .
Many hospitality industries use UV lamps to inspect for unsanitary bedding to determine life-cycle for mattress restoration , as well as general performance of the cleaning staff .
A perennial news feature for many television news organizations involves an investigative reporter 's using a similar device to reveal unsanitary conditions in hotels , public toilets , hand rails , and such .
Pulsed light -LRB- PL -RRB- is a technique of killing microorganisms on surfaces using pulses of an intense broad spectrum , rich in UV-C between 200 and 280 nm .
Pulsed light works with Xenon flash lamps that can produce flashes several times per second .
Disinfection robots use pulsed UV
The Georgics ' tone wavers between optimism and pessimism , sparking critical debate on the poet 's intentions , but the work lays the foundations for later didactic poetry .
Virgil and Maecenas are said to have taken turns reading the Georgics to Octavian upon his return from defeating Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC .
To tune a violin , the A string is first tuned to a standard pitch -LRB- usually 440 Hz -RRB- .
The other strings are then tuned against each other in intervals of perfect fifths by bowing them in pairs .
A minutely higher tuning is sometimes employed for solo playing to give the instrument a brighter sound ; conversely , Baroque music is sometimes played using lower tunings to make the violin 's sound more gentle .
After tuning , the instrument 's bridge may be examined to ensure that it is standing straight and centered between the inner nicks of the f-holes ; a crooked bridge may significantly affect the sound of an otherwise well-made violin .
A violin is usually played using a bow consisting of a stick with a ribbon of horsehair strung between the tip and frog -LRB- or nut , or heel -RRB- at opposite ends .
A typical violin bow may be 75 cm -LRB- 30 in -RRB- overall , and weigh about 60 g -LRB- 2.1 oz -RRB- .
First position , where most beginners start -LRB- although some methods start in third position -RRB- , is the most commonly used position in string music .
The lowest note available in this position in standard tuning is an open G ; the highest note in first position is played with the fourth finger on the E-string , sounding a B.
For example , if you overdo the variation of the note 's tone it may become very distracting and overwhelm the piece .
In acoustic terms , the interest that vibrato adds to the sound has to do with the way that the overtone mix -LRB- or tone color , or timbre -RRB- and the directional pattern of sound projection change with changes in pitch .
By `` pointing '' the sound at different parts of the room in a rhythmic way , vibrato adds a `` shimmer '' or `` liveliness '' to the sound of a well-made violin .
Vibrato is , in a large part , left to the discretion of the violinist .
Different types of vibrato will bring different moods to the piece , and the varying degrees and styles of vibrato are often characteristics that stand out in well-known violinists .
-LRB- abbreviation for pizzicato -RRB- in the written music is to be played by plucking the string with a finger of the right hand rather than by bowing .
-LRB- The index finger is most commonly used here . -RRB-
Sometimes in virtuoso solo music where the bow hand is occupied -LRB- or for show-off effect -RRB- , left-hand pizzicato will be indicated by a + -LRB- plus sign -RRB- below or above the note .
In left-hand pizzicato , two fingers are put on the string ; one -LRB- usually the index or middle finger -RRB- is put on the correct note , and the other -LRB- usually the ring finger or little finger -RRB- is put above the note .
The higher finger then plucks the string while the lower one stays on , thus producing the correct pitch .
By increasing the force of the pluck , one can increase the volume of the note that the string is producing .
Pizzicato are used in orchestral works and in solo showpieces .
In orchestral parts , violinists often have to make very quick shifts from arco to pizzicato , and vice versa .
The quality of a vacuum is indicated by the amount of matter remaining in the system , so that a high quality vacuum is one with very little matter left in it .
Vacuum is primarily measured by its absolute pressure , but a complete characterization requires further parameters , such as temperature and chemical composition .
One of the most important parameters is the mean free path -LRB- MFP -RRB- of residual gases , which indicates the average distance that molecules will travel between collisions with each other .
This vacuum state is called high vacuum , and the study of fluid flows in this regime is called particle gas dynamics .
The Crookes radiometer turns when the MFP is larger than the size of the vanes .
Ultra high vacuum requires baking the chamber to remove trace gases , and other special procedures .
British and German standards define ultra high vacuum as pressures below 10 − 6 Pa -LRB- 10 − 8 Torr -RRB- .
A submarine maintaining an internal pressure of 1 atmosphere submerged to a depth of 10 atmospheres -LRB- 98 metres ; a 9.8 metre column of seawater has the equivalent weight of 1 atm -RRB- is effectively a vacuum chamber keeping out the crushing exterior water pressures , though the 1 atm inside the submarine would not normally be considered a vacuum .
Animal experiments show that rapid and complete recovery is normal for exposures shorter than 90 seconds , while longer full-body exposures are fatal and resuscitation has never been successful .
A study by NASA on eight chimpanzees found all of them survived two and a half minute exposures to vacuum .
Limbs may be exposed for much longer if breathing is not impaired .
Robert Boyle was the first to show in 1660 that vacuum is lethal to small animals .
An ineffectual start led to the conclusion that deeper structural changes were necessary and in June 1987 Gorbachev announced an agenda of economic reform called perestroika , or restructuring .
Perestroika relaxed the production quota system , allowed private ownership of businesses and paved the way for foreign investment .
These measures were intended to redirect the country 's resources from costly Cold War military commitments to more productive areas in the civilian sector .
Gorbachev 's permissive attitude toward Central and Eastern Europe did not initially extend to Soviet territory ; even Bush , who strove to maintain friendly relations , condemned the January 1991 killings in Latvia and Lithuania , privately warning that economic ties would be frozen if the violence continued .
The USSR was fatally weakened by a failed coup and a growing number of Soviet republics , particularly Russia , who threatened to secede from the USSR .
The Commonwealth of Independent States , created on 21 December 1991 , is viewed as a successor entity to the Soviet Union but , according to Russia 's leaders , its purpose was to `` allow a civilized divorce '' between the Soviet Republics and is comparable to a loose confederation .
The USSR was declared officially dissolved on December 26 , 1991 .
In the American view , Stalin seemed a potential ally in accomplishing their goals , whereas in the British approach Stalin appeared as the greatest threat to the fulfillment of their agenda .
With the Soviets already occupying most of Central and Eastern Europe , Stalin was at an advantage and the two western leaders vied for his favors .
The differences between Roosevelt and Churchill led to several separate deals with the Soviets .
In October 1944 , Churchill traveled to Moscow and agreed to divide the Balkans into respective spheres of influence , and at Yalta Roosevelt signed a separate deal with Stalin in regard of Asia and refused to support Churchill on the issues of Poland and the Reparations .
The term `` cold '' is used because there was no large-scale fighting directly between the two sides , although there were major regional wars , known as proxy wars , supported by the two sides .
The Cold War split the temporary wartime alliance against Nazi Germany , leaving the Soviet Union and the United States as two superpowers with profound economic and political differences .
The USSR was a Marxist -- Leninist state ruled by its Communist Party and secret police , who in turn were ruled by a dictator -LRB- Stalin -RRB- or a small committee -LRB- `` Politburo '' -RRB- .
The Party controlled the press , the military , the economy and all organizations .
In opposition stood the West , dominantly democratic and capitalist with a free press and independent organizations .
A small neutral bloc arose with the Non-Aligned Movement ; it sought good relations with both sides .
The two superpowers never engaged directly in full-scale armed combat , but they were heavily armed in preparation for a possible all-out nuclear world war .
Each side had a nuclear strategy that discouraged an attack by the other side , on the basis that such an attack would lead to the total destruction of the attacker : the doctrine of mutually assured destruction -LRB- MAD -RRB- .
Aside from the development of the two sides ' nuclear arsenals , and their deployment of conventional military forces , the struggle for dominance was expressed via proxy wars around the globe , psychological warfare , massive propaganda campaigns and espionage , rivalry at sports events , and technological competitions such as the Space Race .
Even though the Chinese and North Koreans were exhausted by the war and were prepared to end it by late 1952 , Stalin insisted that they continue fighting , and the Armistice was approved only in July 1953 , after Stalin 's death .
North Korean leader Kim Il Sung created a highly centralized , totalitarian dictatorship -- which continues to date -- according himself unlimited power and generating a formidable cult of personality .
In the South , the American-backed strongman Syngman Rhee ran a significantly less brutal but deeply corrupt and authoritarian regime .
After Rhee was overthrown in 1960 , South Korea fell within a year under a period of military rule that lasted until the re-establishment of a multi-party system in the late 1980s .
Nationalist movements in some countries and regions , notably Guatemala , Indonesia and Indochina were often allied with communist groups , or perceived in the West to be allied with communists .
In this context , the United States and the Soviet Union increasingly competed for influence by proxy in the Third World as decolonization gained momentum in the 1950s and early 1960s ; additionally , the Soviets saw continuing losses by imperial powers as presaging the eventual victory of their ideology .
Both sides were selling armaments to gain influence .
The period after 1956 was marked by serious setbacks for the Soviet Union , most notably the breakdown of the Sino-Soviet alliance , beginning the Sino-Soviet split .
Mao had defended Stalin when Khrushchev attacked him after his death in 1956 , and treated the new Soviet leader as a superficial upstart , accusing him of having lost his revolutionary edge .
For his part , Khrushchev , disturbed by Mao 's glib attitude toward nuclear war , referred to the Chinese leader as a `` lunatic on a throne '' .
The Soviet Union initially signed a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany in August 1939 .
But after the German Army invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 and the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor in December 1941 , the Soviet Union and the Allied powers formed an alliance of convenience .
Britain signed a formal alliance and the United States made an informal agreement .
In wartime , the United States supplied both Britain and the Soviets through its Lend-Lease Program .
However , Stalin remained highly suspicious and he believed that the British and the Americans had conspired to ensure that the Soviets bore the brunt of the fighting against Nazi Germany .
According to this view , the Western Allies had deliberately delayed opening a second anti-German front in order to step in at the last minute and shape the peace settlement .
Thus , Soviet perceptions of the West left a strong undercurrent of tension and hostility between the Allied powers .
The effects of local surface low pressure are extremely limited because upper-level subsidence still continues to block any form of air ascent .
Also , to be protected against rain-bearing weather systems by the atmospheric circulation itself , the desert is made even drier by his geographical configuration and location .
Indeed , the extreme aridity of the Sahara can not be only explained by the subtropical high pressure .
The Atlas Mountains , found in Algeria , Morocco and Tunisia also help to enhance the aridity of the northern part of the desert .
These major mountain ranges act as a barrier causing a strong rain shadow effect on the leeward side by dropping much of the humidity brought by atmospheric disturbances along the polar front which affects the surrounding Mediterranean climates .
In the West Saharan montane xeric woodlands , several volcanic highlands provide a cooler , moister environment that supports Saharo-Mediterranean woodlands and shrublands .
The ecoregion covers 258,100 square kilometres -LRB- 99,700 sq mi -RRB- , mostly in the Tassili n'Ajjer of Algeria , with smaller enclaves in the Aïr of Niger , the Dhar Adrar of Mauritania , and the Adrar des Iforas of Mali and Algeria .
People lived on the edge of the desert thousands of years ago since the last ice age .
Over 30,000 petroglyphs of river animals such as crocodiles survive , with half found in the Tassili n'Ajjer in southeast Algeria .
Fossils of dinosaurs , including Afrovenator , Jobaria and Ouranosaurus , have also been found here .
The modern Sahara , though , is not lush in vegetation , except in the Nile Valley , at a few oases , and in the northern highlands , where Mediterranean plants such as the olive tree are found to grow .
It was long believed that the region had been this way since about 1600 BCE , after shifts in the Earth 's axis increased temperatures and decreased precipitation , which led to the abrupt desertification of North Africa about 5,400 years ago .
However , this theory has recently been called into dispute , when samples taken from several 7 million year old sand deposits led scientists to reconsider the timeline for desertification .
Egypt , under Muhammad Ali and his successors , conquered Nubia in 1820 -- 22 , founded Khartoum in 1823 , and conquered Darfur in 1874 .
Egypt , including the Sudan , became a British protectorate in 1882 .
Egypt and Britain lost control of the Sudan from 1882 to 1898 as a result of the Mahdist War .
After its capture by British troops in 1898 , the Sudan became an Anglo-Egyptian condominium .
After the altercation with Gauguin , Van Gogh returned to his room , where he was assaulted by voices and severed his left ear with a razor -LRB- either wholly or in part ; accounts differ -RRB- , causing severe bleeding .
He bandaged the wound , wrapped the ear in paper , and delivered the package to a woman at a brothel Van Gogh and Gauguin both frequented .
Van Gogh was found unconscious the next morning by a policeman and taken to hospital , where Félix Rey , a young doctor still in training , treated him .
The ear was delivered to the hospital , but Rey did not attempt to reattach it as too much time had passed .
Vikings -LRB- Danish and Bokmål : vikinger ; Swedish and Nynorsk : vikingar ; Icelandic : víkingar -RRB- , from Old Norse víkingr , were Nordic seafarers , mainly speaking the Old Norse language , who raided and traded from their Northern European homelands across wide areas of northern , central and eastern Europe , during the late 8th to late 11th centuries .
The term is also commonly extended in modern English and other vernaculars to the inhabitants of Viking home communities during what has become known as the Viking Age .
This period of Nordic military , mercantile and demographic expansion constitutes an important element in the early medieval history of Scandinavia , Estonia , the British Isles , France , Kievan Rus ' and Sicily .
The majority of runic inscriptions from the Viking period are found in Sweden and date from the 11th century .
The oldest stone with runic inscriptions was found in Norway and dates to the 4th century , suggesting that runic inscriptions pre-date the Viking period .
Many runestones in Scandinavia record the names of participants in Viking expeditions , such as the Kjula runestone that tells of extensive warfare in Western Europe and the Turinge Runestone , which tells of a war band in Eastern Europe .
Other runestones mention men who died on Viking expeditions .
Among them are around 25 Ingvar runestones in the Mälardalen district of Sweden , erected to commemorate members of a disastrous expedition into present-day Russia in the early 11th century .
Runestones attest to voyages to locations such as Bath , Greece , Khwaresm , Jerusalem , Italy -LRB- as Langobardland -RRB- , Serkland -LRB- i.e. the Muslim world -RRB- , England -LRB- including London -RRB- , and various places in Eastern Europe .
One etymology derives víking from the feminine vík , meaning `` creek , inlet , small bay '' .
Various theories have been offered that the word viking may be derived from the name of the historical Norwegian district of Viken -LRB- or Víkin in Old Norse -RRB- , meaning `` a person from Viken '' .
According to this theory , the word simply described persons from this area , and it is only in the last few centuries that it has taken on the broader sense of early medieval Scandinavians in general .
People from the Viken area were not called ` Viking ' in Old Norse manuscripts , but are referred to as víkverir -LRB- Modern Norwegian : vikvær -RRB- , ` Vík dwellers ' .
In addition , that explanation could only explain the masculine -LRB- Old Scandinavian víkingr -RRB- and ignore the feminine -LRB- Old Norse víking -RRB- , which is a serious problem because the masculine is easily derived from the feminine but hardly vice versa .
The thralls or servants took care of most of the daily chores , while the Jarls engaged in administration , politics , hunting , sports , paid visits to other Jarls or were abroad on expeditions .
When a Jarl died and was buried , his household thralls were sometimes sacrificially killed and buried next to him , as many excavations have revealed .
Horse fighting was practised for sport , although the rules are unclear .
It appears to have involved two stallions pitted against each other , within smell and sight of fenced-off mares .
Whatever the rules were , the fights often resulted in the death of one of the stallions .
The Slavs , the Arabs and the Byzantines knew them as the Rus ' or Rhōs , probably derived from various uses of rōþs - , `` related to rowing '' , or derived from the area of Roslagen in east-central Sweden , where most of the Vikings who visited the Slavic lands came from .
Some archaeologists and historians of today believe that these Scandinavian settlements in the Slavic lands played a significant role in the formation of the Kievan Rus ' federation , and hence the names and early states of Russia and Belarus .
The Slavs and the Byzantines also called them Varangians -LRB- Russian : варяги , from Old Norse Væringjar , meaning ` sworn men ' , from vàr - `` confidence , vow of fealty , '' related to Old English wær `` agreement , treaty , promise , '' Old High German wara `` faithfulness '' -RRB- .
Norse Mythology , sagas , and literature tell of Scandinavian culture and religion through tales of heroic and mythological heroes .
Early transmission of this information was primarily oral , and later texts were reliant upon the writings and transcriptions of Christian scholars , including the Icelanders Snorri Sturluson and Sæmundur fróði .
Many of these sagas were written in Iceland , and most of them , even if they had no Icelandic provenance , were preserved there after the Middle Ages due to the continued interest of Icelanders in Norse literature and law codes .
Early modern publications , dealing with what is now called Viking culture , appeared in the 16th century , e.g. Historia de gentibus septentrionalibus -LRB- Olaus Magnus , 1555 -RRB- , and the first edition of the 13th-century Gesta Danorum of Saxo Grammaticus in 1514 .
The pace of publication increased during the 17th century with Latin translations of the Edda -LRB- notably Peder Resen 's Edda Islandorum of 1665 -RRB- .
The word `` viking '' was first popularised at the beginning of the 19th century by Erik Gustaf Geijer in his poem , The Viking .
Geijer 's poem did much to propagate the new romanticised ideal of the Viking , which had little basis in historical fact .
The renewed interest of Romanticism in the Old North had contemporary political implications .
The Geatish Society , of which Geijer was a member , popularised this myth to a great extent .
Another Swedish author who had great influence on the perception of the Vikings was Esaias Tegnér , member of the Geatish Society , who wrote a modern version of Friðþjófs saga hins frœkna , which became widely popular in the Nordic countries , the United Kingdom , and Germany .
The Vikings were often depicted with winged helmets and in other clothing taken from Classical antiquity , especially in depictions of Norse gods .
This was done to legitimize the Vikings and their mythology by associating it with the Classical world , which had long been idealized in European culture .
Under the Paris Peace Accords , between North Vietnamese Foreign Minister Lê Đức Thọ and U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger , and reluctantly signed by South Vietnamese president Thiệu , U.S. military forces withdrew from South Vietnam and prisoners were exchanged .
North Vietnam was allowed to continue supplying communist troops in the South , but only to the extent of replacing expended materiel .
Later that year the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Kissinger and Thọ , but the Vietnamese negotiator declined it saying that a true peace did not yet exist .
With the northern half of the country under their control , the Politburo ordered General Dung to launch the final offensive against Saigon .
Hanoi wished to avoid the coming monsoon and prevent any redeployment of ARVN forces defending the capital .
Northern forces , their morale boosted by their recent victories , rolled on , taking Nha Trang , Cam Ranh , and Da Lat .
Sino-Soviet relations soured after the Soviets invaded Czechoslovakia in August 1968 .
In October , the Chinese demanded North Vietnam cut relations with Moscow , but Hanoi refused .
The Chinese began to withdraw in November 1968 in preparation for a clash with the Soviets , which occurred at Zhenbao Island in March 1969 .
The Chinese also began financing the Khmer Rouge as a counterweight to the Vietnamese communists at this time .
As a result of a decision of the Korean Workers ' Party in October 1966 , in early 1967 North Korea sent a fighter squadron to North Vietnam to back up the North Vietnamese 921st and 923rd fighter squadrons defending Hanoi .
They stayed through 1968 , and 200 pilots were reported to have served .
During August the Imperial Japanese forces remained inactive as the Viet Minh and other nationalist groups took over public buildings and weapons , which began the August Revolution .
OSS officers met repeatedly with Ho Chi Minh and other Viet Minh officers during this period and on 2 September 1945 Ho Chi Minh declared the independent Democratic Republic of Vietnam before a crowd of 500,000 in Hanoi .
In an overture to the Americans , he began his speech by paraphrasing the United States Declaration of Independence : `` All men are created equal .
The Creator has given us certain inviolable Rights : the right to Life , the right to be Free , and the right to achieve Happiness . ''
In the Cambodian Civil War , Khmer Rouge insurgents reportedly committed atrocities during the war .
These include the murder of civilians and POWs by slowly sawing off their heads a little more each day , the destruction of Buddhist wats and the killing of monks , attacks on refugee camps involving the deliberate murder of babies and bomb threats against foreign aid workers , the abduction and assassination of journalists , and the shelling of Phnom Penh for more than a year .
Journalist accounts stated that the Khmer Rouge shelling `` tortured the capital almost continuously '' , inflicting `` random death and mutilation '' on 2 million trapped civilians .
During the Vietnam War , American women served on active duty doing a variety of jobs .
Early in 1963 , the Army Nurse Corps -LRB- ANC -RRB- launched Operation Nightingale , an intensive effort to recruit nurses to serve in Vietnam .
Most nurses who volunteered to serve in Vietnam came from predominantly working or middle-class families with histories of military service .
Because the need for medical aid was great , many nurses underwent a concentrated four-month training program before being deployed to Vietnam in the ANC .
Due to the shortage of staff , nurses usually worked twelve-hour shifts , six days per week and often suffered from exhaustion .
First Lieutenant Sharon Lane was the only female military nurse to be killed by enemy gunfire during the war , on 8 June 1969 .
The experience of African American military personnel during the Vietnam War has received significant attention .
For example , the website `` African-American Involvement in the Vietnam War '' compiles examples of such coverage , as does the print and broadcast work of journalist Wallace Terry .
The epigraph of Terry 's book Bloods : An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans -LRB- 1984 -RRB- , includes the following quote : `` I have an intuitive feeling that the Negro serviceman have a better understanding than whites of what the war is about . ''
That book 's introduction includes observations about the impact of the war on the black community in general and on black servicemen specifically .
Points he makes on the latter topic include : the higher proportion of combat casualties in Vietnam among African American servicemen than among American soldiers of other races , the shift toward and different attitudes of black military careerists versus black draftees , the discrimination encountered by black servicemen `` on the battlefield in decorations , promotion and duty assignments '' as well as their having to endure `` the racial insults , cross-burnings and Confederate flags of their white comrades '' -- and the experiences faced by black soldiers stateside , during the war and after America 's withdrawal .
Upon the war 's completion , black casualties made up 12.5 % of US combat deaths , approximately equal to percentage of draft-eligible black men , though still slightly higher than the 10 % who served in the military .
While the Viet Cong had both amphibious tanks -LRB- such as the PT-76 -RRB- and light tanks -LRB- such as the Type 62 -RRB- , they also used bicycles to transport munitions .
The US ' heavily armored , 90 mm M48A3 Patton tank saw extensive action during the Vietnam War and over 600 were deployed with US Forces .
U.S. carriers sailed to the Gulf of Tonkin , and reconnaissance flights over Điện Biên Phủ were conducted during the negotiations .
According to U.S. Vice-President Richard Nixon , the plan involved the Joint Chiefs of Staff drawing up plans to use three small tactical nuclear weapons in support of the French .
Nixon , a so-called `` hawk '' on Vietnam , suggested that the United States might have to `` put American boys in '' .
U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower made American participation contingent on British support , but they were opposed to such a venture .
In the end , convinced that the political risks outweighed the possible benefits , Eisenhower decided against the intervention .
He was wary of getting the United States involved in a land war in Asia .
Former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara wrote in Argument Without End -LRB- 1999 -RRB- that the new American patrons of the Republic of Vietnam -LRB- ROV -RRB- were almost completely ignorant of Vietnamese culture .
There was a tendency to assign American motives to Vietnamese actions , though Diệm warned that it was an illusion to believe that blindly copying Western methods would solve Vietnamese problems .
Various names have been applied to the conflict .
The plan was approved by Johnson and marked a profound departure from the previous administration 's insistence that the government of South Vietnam was responsible for defeating the guerrillas .
Westmoreland predicted victory by the end of 1967 .
Johnson did not , however , communicate this change in strategy to the media .
The change in U.S. policy depended on matching the North Vietnamese and the Viet Cong in a contest of attrition and morale .
The opponents were locked in a cycle of escalation .
The idea that the government of South Vietnam could manage its own affairs was shelved .
The Johnson administration employed a `` policy of minimum candor '' in its dealings with the media .
Military information officers sought to manage media coverage by emphasizing stories that portrayed progress in the war .
Over time , this policy damaged the public trust in official pronouncements .
As the media 's coverage of the war and that of the Pentagon diverged , a so-called credibility gap developed .
In 1940 , during World War II , the French were defeated by the Germans .
The French State -LRB- commonly known as Vichy France -RRB- was established as a client state of Nazi Germany .
The French colonial authorities , in French Indochina , sided with the Vichy regime .
In September 1940 , Japan invaded Indochina .
Following the cessation of fighting and the beginning of the Imperial Japanese occupation , the French colonial authorities collaborated with the Japanese .
The French continued to run affairs in Indochina , but ultimate power resided in the hands of the Imperial Japanese .
Venus is the second planet from the Sun , orbiting it every 224.7 Earth days .
It is the second-brightest natural object in the night sky after the Moon , reaching an apparent magnitude of − 4.6 , bright enough to cast shadows .
A rosé wine incorporates some of the color from the grape skins , but not enough to qualify it as a red wine .
It may be the oldest known type of wine , as it is the most straightforward to make with the skin contact method .
The pink color can range from a pale orange to a vivid near-purple , depending on the varietals used and winemaking techniques .
There are three primary ways to produce rosé wine : skin contact -LRB- allowing dark grape skins to stain the wort -RRB- , saignée -LRB- removing juice from the must early in fermentation and continuing fermentation of the juice separately -RRB- , and blending -LRB- uncommon and discouraged in most wine growing regions -RRB- .
Rosé wines can be made still , semi-sparkling , or sparkling , with a wide range of sweetness levels from dry Provençal rosé to sweet White Zinfandels and blushes .
Rosé wines are made from a wide variety of grapes all over the world .
Wine has long played an important role in religion .
Red wine was associated with blood by the ancient Egyptians and was used by both the Greek cult of Dionysus and the Romans in their Bacchanalia ; Judaism also incorporates it in the Kiddush and Christianity in the Eucharist .
Wine is important in cuisine not just for its value as a beverage , but as a flavor agent , primarily in stocks and braising , since its acidity lends balance to rich savory or sweet dishes .
Wine sauce is an example of a culinary sauce that uses wine as a primary ingredient .
Natural wines may exhibit a broad range of alcohol content , from below 9 % to above 16 % ABV , with most wines being in the 12.5 % -- 14.5 % range .
Fortified wines -LRB- usually with brandy -RRB- may contain 20 % alcohol or more .
Most wines are sold in glass bottles and sealed with corks -LRB- 50 % of which come from Portugal -RRB- .
An increasing number of wine producers have been using alternative closures such as screwcaps and synthetic plastic `` corks '' .
Although alternative closures are less expensive and prevent cork taint , they have been blamed for such problems as excessive reduction .
Scholars generally agree that a turning point for the World Wide Web began with the introduction of the Mosaic web browser in 1993 , a graphical browser developed by a team at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign -LRB- NCSA-UIUC -RRB- , led by Marc Andreessen .
Funding for Mosaic came from the U.S. High-Performance Computing and Communications Initiative and the High Performance Computing and Communication Act of 1991 , one of several computing developments initiated by U.S. Senator Al Gore .
Prior to the release of Mosaic , graphics were not commonly mixed with text in web pages and the web 's popularity was less than older protocols in use over the Internet , such as Gopher and Wide Area Information Servers -LRB- WAIS -RRB- .
Mosaic 's graphical user interface allowed the Web to become , by far , the most popular Internet protocol .
The World Wide Web Consortium -LRB- W3C -RRB- was founded by Tim Berners-Lee after he left the European Organization for Nuclear Research -LRB- CERN -RRB- in October 1994 .
It was founded at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Laboratory for Computer Science -LRB- MIT/LCS -RRB- with support from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency -LRB- DARPA -RRB- , which had pioneered the Internet ; a year later , a second site was founded at INRIA -LRB- a French national computer research lab -RRB- with support from the European Commission DG InfSo ; and in 1996 , a third continental site was created in Japan at Keio University .
By the end of 1994 , the total number of websites was still relatively small , but many notable websites were already active that foreshadowed or inspired today 's most popular services .
In January 1781 , Mozart 's opera Idomeneo premiered with `` considerable success '' in Munich .
The following March , Mozart was summoned to Vienna , where his employer , Archbishop Colloredo , was attending the celebrations for the accession of Joseph II to the Austrian throne .
For Colloredo , this was simply a matter of wanting his musical servant to be at hand -LRB- Mozart indeed was required to dine in Colloredo 's establishment with the valets and cooks . -RRB-
But Mozart was planning a bigger career even as he continued in the archbishop 's service ; for example , to his father he wrote :
Near the height of his quarrels with Colloredo , Mozart moved in with the Weber family , who had moved to Vienna from Mannheim .
The father , Fridolin , had died , and the Webers were now taking in lodgers to make ends meet .
On 14 December 1784 , Mozart became a Freemason , admitted to the lodge Zur Wohltätigkeit -LRB- `` Beneficence '' -RRB- .
Freemasonry played an important role in the remainder of Mozart 's life : he attended meetings , a number of his friends were Masons , and on various occasions he composed Masonic music , e. g. the Maurerische Trauermusik .
On 26 December 1941 , Churchill addressed a joint meeting of the US Congress , asking of Germany and Japan , `` What kind of people do they think we are ? ''
Churchill initiated the Special Operations Executive -LRB- SOE -RRB- under Hugh Dalton 's Ministry of Economic Warfare , which established , conducted and fostered covert , subversive and partisan operations in occupied territories with notable success ; and also the Commandos which established the pattern for most of the world 's current Special Forces .
Ultimately , responsibility for the British part of the attack lay with Churchill , which is why he has been criticised for allowing the bombings to occur .
German historian Jörg Friedrich claims that Churchill 's decision was a `` war crime '' , and , writing in 2006 , philosopher A.C. Grayling questioned the whole strategic bombing campaign by the RAF , presenting the argument that although it was not a war crime it was a moral crime that undermines the Allies ' contention that they fought a just war .
On the other hand , it has been asserted that Churchill 's involvement in the bombing of Dresden was based on strategic and tactical aspects of winning the war .
The destruction of Dresden , while immense , was designed to expedite the defeat of Germany .
As historian and journalist Max Hastings wrote in an article subtitled `` the Allied Bombing of Dresden '' : `` I believe it is wrong to describe strategic bombing as a war crime , for this might be held to suggest some moral equivalence with the deeds of the Nazis .
Bombing represented a sincere , albeit mistaken , attempt to bring about Germany 's military defeat . ''
British historian Frederick Taylor asserts that `` All sides bombed each other 's cities during the war .
Half a million Soviet citizens , for example , died from German bombing during the invasion and occupation of Russia .
That 's roughly equivalent to the number of German citizens who died from Allied raids . ''
His wife believed that he had made a number of visits to the US in the following years in an attempt to help repair Anglo-American relations .
The Royal Artillery fired the 19-gun salute due a head of government , and the RAF staged a fly-by of sixteen English Electric Lightning fighters .
The coffin was then taken the short distance to Waterloo station where it was loaded onto a specially prepared and painted carriage as part of the funeral train for its rail journey to Hanborough , seven miles northwest of Oxford .
Churchill was a prolific writer , often under the pen name `` Winston S. Churchill '' , which he used by agreement with the American novelist of the same name to avoid confusion between their works .
His output included a novel , two biographies , three volumes of memoirs , and several histories .
He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1953 `` for his mastery of historical and biographical description as well as for brilliant oratory in defending exalted human values '' .
Two of his most famous works , published after his first premiership brought his international fame to new heights , were his six-volume memoir The Second World War and A History of the English-Speaking Peoples ; a four-volume history covering the period from Caesar 's invasions of Britain -LRB- 55 BC -RRB- to the beginning of the First World War -LRB- 1914 -RRB- .
the first of which , Into Battle , was published in the United States under the title Blood , Sweat and Tears , and was included in Life Magazine 's list of the 100 outstanding books of 1924 -- 1944 .
In 1941 , he was made a Regimental Colonel of the 4th Hussars .
In October 1911 , Churchill was appointed First Lord of the Admiralty and continued in the post into the First World War .
While serving in this position , he put strong emphasis on modernisation and was also in favour of using aeroplanes in combat .
He launched a programme to replace coal power with oil power .
When he assumed his position , oil was already being used on submarines and destroyers , but most ships were still coal-powered , though oil was sprayed on the coals to boost maximum speed .
Churchill began this programme by ordering that the upcoming Queen Elizabeth-class battleships were to be built with oil-fired engines .
He established a Royal Commission chaired by Admiral Sir John Fisher , which confirmed the benefits of oil over coal in three classified reports , and judged that ample supplies of oil existed , but recommended that oil reserves be maintained in the event of war .
The delegation then travelled to the Persian Gulf , and the government , largely through Churchill 's advice , eventually invested in the Anglo-Persian Oil Company , bought most of its stock , and negotiated a secret contract for a 20-year supply .
Named the Greatest Briton of all time in a 2002 poll , Churchill is widely regarded as being among the most influential people in British history , consistently ranking well in opinion polls of Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom .
His highly complex legacy continues to stimulate intense debate amongst writers and historians .
The second issue was a claim by Churchill that Sir Samuel Hoare and Lord Derby had pressured the Manchester Chamber of Commerce to change evidence it had given to the Joint Select Committee considering the Government of India Bill , and in doing so had breached Parliamentary privilege .
He had the matter referred to the House of Commons Privilege Committee which , after investigations in which Churchill gave evidence , reported to the House that there had been no breach .
The report was debated on 13 June 1934 .
Churchill was unable to find a single supporter in the House and the debate ended without a division .
The color becomes increasingly stronger and darker with increasing thickness .
-LRB- Practically no sunlight reaches the parts of the oceans below 1000 meters of depth . -RRB-
Infrared and ultraviolet light , on the other hand , is strongly absorbed by water .
The surface temperature of Earth has been relatively constant through geologic time despite varying levels of incoming solar radiation -LRB- insolation -RRB- , indicating that a dynamic process governs Earth 's temperature via a combination of greenhouse gases and surface or atmospheric albedo .
This proposal is known as the Gaia hypothesis .
Some runoff water is trapped for periods of time , for example in lakes .
At high altitude , during winter , and in the far north and south , snow collects in ice caps , snow pack and glaciers .
Water also infiltrates the ground and goes into aquifers .
This groundwater later flows back to the surface in springs , or more spectacularly in hot springs and geysers .
Groundwater is also extracted artificially in wells .
Water hardness is also a critical factor in food processing and may be altered or treated by using a chemical ion exchange system .
It can dramatically affect the quality of a product , as well as playing a role in sanitation .
Water hardness is classified based on concentration of calcium carbonate the water contains .
Water is classified as soft if it contains less than 100 mg/l -LRB- UK -RRB- or less than 60 mg/l -LRB- USA -RRB- .
1.6 billion people have gained access to a safe water source since 1990 .
The proportion of people in developing countries with access to safe water is calculated to have improved from 30 % in 1970 to 71 % in 1990 , 79 % in 2000 and 84 % in 2004 .
This trend is projected to continue .
To halve , by 2015 , the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water is one of the Millennium Development Goals .
This goal is projected to be reached .
The Ancient Greek philosopher Empedocles held that water is one of the four classical elements along with fire , earth and air , and was regarded as the ylem , or basic substance of the universe .
Thales , who was portrayed by Aristotle as an astronomer and an engineer , theorized that the earth , which is denser than water , emerged from the water .
Thales , a monist , believed further that all things are made from water .
Plato believed the shape of water is an icosahedron which accounts for why it is able to flow easily compared to the cube-shaped earth .
Plans to artificially oxygenate areas of the Baltic that have experienced eutrophication have been proposed by the University of Gothenburg and Inocean AB .
The proposal intends to use wind-driven pumps to inject oxygen -LRB- air -RRB- into waters at , or around , 130m below sea level .
Firearms are qualitatively different from earlier weapons because they release energy from combustible propellants such as gunpowder , rather than from a counter-weight or spring .
This energy is released very rapidly and can be replicated without much effort by the user .
Firearms became increasingly important and effective during the 16th century to 19th century , with progressive improvements in ignition mechanisms followed by revolutionary changes in ammunition handling and propellant .
During the U.S. Civil War various technologies including the machine gun and ironclad warship emerged that would be recognizable and useful military weapons today , particularly in limited conflicts .
In the 19th century warship propulsion changed from sail power to fossil fuel-powered steam engines .
During the Cold War in the years following World War II , both the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in a nuclear arms race .
Each country and their allies continually attempted to out-develop each other in the field of nuclear armaments .
Once the joint technological capabilities reached the point of being able to ensure the destruction of the entire planet -LRB- see nuclear holocaust -RRB- then a new tactic had to be developed .
With this realization , armaments development funding shifted back to primarily sponsoring the development of conventional arms technologies for support of limited wars rather than nuclear war .
In melody , blues is distinguished by the use of the flattened third , fifth and seventh of the associated major scale .
These specialized notes are called the blue or bent notes .
These scale tones may replace the natural scale tones , or they may be added to the scale , as in the case of the minor blues scale , in which the flattened third replaces the natural third , the flattened seventh replaces the natural seventh and the flattened fifth is added between the natural fourth and natural fifth .
While the 12-bar harmonic progression had been intermittently used for centuries , the revolutionary aspect of blues was the frequent use of the flattened third , flattened seventh , and even flattened fifth in the melody , together with crushing -- playing directly adjacent notes at the same time -LRB- i.e. , minor second -RRB- -- and sliding , similar to using grace notes .
The blue notes allow for key moments of expression during the cadences , melodies , and embellishments of the blues .
Blues shuffles or walking bass reinforce the trance-like rhythm and call-and-response , and they form a repetitive effect called a groove .
Characteristic of the blues since its Afro-American origins , the shuffles played a central role in swing music .
The simplest shuffles , which were the clearest signature of the R&B wave that started in the mid-1940s , were a three-note riff on the bass strings of the guitar .
When this riff was played over the bass and the drums , the groove `` feel '' was created .
Shuffle rhythm is often vocalized as `` dow , da dow , da dow , da '' or `` dump , da dump , da dump , da '' : it consists of uneven , or `` swung '' , eighth notes .
On a guitar this may be played as a simple steady bass or it may add to that stepwise quarter note motion from the fifth to the sixth of the chord and back .
Reports of blues music in southern Texas and the Deep South were written at the dawn of the 20th century .
Charles Peabody mentioned the appearance of blues music at Clarksdale , Mississippi , and Gate Thomas reported similar songs in southern Texas around 1901 -- 1902 .
These observations coincide more or less with the recollections of Jelly Roll Morton , who said he first heard blues music in New Orleans in 1902 ; Ma Rainey , who remembered first hearing the blues in the same year in Missouri ; and W.C. Handy , who first heard the blues in Tutwiler , Mississippi , in 1903 .
The first extensive research in the field was performed by Howard W. Odum , who published an anthology of folk songs from Lafayette County , Mississippi , and Newton County , Georgia , between 1905 and 1908 .
The first noncommercial recordings of blues music , termed proto-blues by Paul Oliver , were made by Odum for research purposes at the very beginning of the 20th century .
Depending on the religious community a musician belonged to , it was more or less considered a sin to play this low-down music : blues was the devil 's music .
Musicians were therefore segregated into two categories : gospel singers and blues singers , guitar preachers and songsters .
However , when rural black music began to be recorded in the 1920s , both categories of musicians used similar techniques : call-and-response patterns , blue notes , and slide guitars .
The transition from country blues to urban blues that began in the 1920s was driven by the successive waves of economic crisis and booms which led many rural blacks to move to urban areas , in a movement known as the Great Migration .
The long boom following World War II induced another massive migration of the African-American population , the Second Great Migration , which was accompanied by a significant increase of the real income of the urban blacks .
The term race record , initially used by the music industry for African-American music , was replaced by the term rhythm and blues .
This rapidly evolving market was mirrored by Billboard magazine 's Rhythm and Blues chart .
This marketing strategy reinforced trends in urban blues music such as the use of electric instruments and amplification and the generalization of the blues beat , the blues shuffle , which became ubiquitous in R&B .
This commercial stream had important consequences for blues music , which , together with jazz and gospel music , became a component of R&B .
Little Walter , Sonny Boy Williamson -LRB- Rice Miller -RRB- and Sonny Terry are well known harmonica -LRB- called `` harp '' by blues musicians -RRB- players of the early Chicago blues scene .
Muddy Waters and Elmore James were known for their innovative use of slide electric guitar .
Howlin ' Wolf and Muddy Waters were known for their deep , `` gravelly '' voices .
A hubless wheel -LRB- also known as a rim-rider or centerless wheel -RRB- is a type of wheel with no center hub .
The axle is hollow , following the wheel at very close tolerances .
The invention of the wheel falls into the late Neolithic , and may be seen in conjunction with other technological advances that gave rise to the early Bronze Age .
Note that this implies the passage of several wheel-less millennia even after the invention of agriculture and of pottery , during the Aceramic Neolithic -LRB- 9500 -- 6500 BCE -RRB- .
In 2003 , the WHO denounced the Roman Curia 's health department 's opposition to the use of condoms , saying : `` These incorrect statements about condoms and HIV are dangerous when we are facing a global pandemic which has already killed more than 20 million people , and currently affects at least 42 million . ''
As of 2009 , the Catholic Church remains opposed to increasing the use of contraception to combat HIV/AIDS .
At the time , the World Health Assembly President , Guyana 's Health Minister Leslie Ramsammy , condemned Pope Benedict 's opposition to contraception , saying he was trying to `` create confusion '' and `` impede '' proven strategies in the battle against the disease .
By the post-pandemic period critics claimed the WHO had exaggerated the danger , spreading `` fear and confusion '' rather than `` immediate information '' .
Industry experts countered that the 2009 pandemic had led to `` unprecedented collaboration between global health authorities , scientists and manufacturers , resulting in the most comprehensive pandemic response ever undertaken , with a number of vaccines approved for use three months after the pandemic declaration .
This response was only possible because of the extensive preparations undertaken in during the last decade '' .
In 1998 , WHO 's Director General highlighted gains in child survival , reduced infant mortality , increased life expectancy and reduced rates of `` scourges '' such as smallpox and polio on the fiftieth anniversary of WHO 's founding .
He , did , however , accept that more had to be done to assist maternal health and that progress in this area had been slow .
Cholera and malaria have remained problems since WHO 's founding , although in decline for a large part of that period .
In the twenty-first century , the Stop TB Partnership was created in 2000 , along with the UN 's formulation of the Millennium Development Goals .
The Measles initiative was formed in 2001 , and credited with reducing global deaths from the disease by 68 % by 2007 .
In 2002 , The Global Fund to Fight AIDS , Tuberculosis and Malaria was drawn up to improve the resources available .
In 2006 , the organization endorsed the world 's first official HIV/AIDS Toolkit for Zimbabwe , which formed the basis for a global prevention , treatment and support plan to fight the AIDS pandemic .
Beer is composed mostly of water .
Regions have water with different mineral components ; as a result , different regions were originally better suited to making certain types of beer , thus giving them a regional character .
For example , Dublin has hard water well-suited to making stout , such as Guinness ; while the Plzeň Region has soft water well-suited to making Pilsner -LRB- pale lager -RRB- , such as Pilsner Urquell .
The waters of Burton in England contain gypsum , which benefits making pale ale to such a degree that brewers of pale ales will add gypsum to the local water in a process known as Burtonisation .
Yeast metabolises the sugars extracted from grains , which produces alcohol and carbon dioxide , and thereby turns wort into beer .
In addition to fermenting the beer , yeast influences the character and flavour .
Pale lagers are the most commonly consumed beers in the world .
The name `` lager '' comes from the German `` lagern '' for `` to store '' , as brewers around Bavaria stored beer in cool cellars and caves during the warm summer months .
These brewers noticed that the beers continued to ferment , and to also clear of sediment , when stored in cool conditions .
Brazil produced significant works in Romanticism -- novelists like Joaquim Manuel de Macedo and José de Alencar wrote novels about love and pain .
Alencar , in his long career , also treated indigenous people as heroes in the Indigenist novels O Guarani , Iracema and Ubirajara .
Machado de Assis , one of his contemporaries , wrote in virtually all genres and continues to gain international prestige from critics worldwide .
Tensions between Portuguese and Brazilians increased , and the Portuguese Cortes , guided by the new political regime imposed by the 1820 Liberal Revolution , tried to re-establish Brazil as a colony .
The Brazilians refused to yield , and Prince Pedro decided to stand with them , declaring the country 's independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822 .
A month later , Prince Pedro was declared the first Emperor of Brazil , with the regnal title of Dom Pedro I , resulting in the foundation of the Empire of Brazil .
It consists of the Brazilian Army -LRB- including the Army Aviation Command -RRB- , the Brazilian Navy -LRB- including the Marine Corps and Naval Aviation -RRB- , and the Brazilian Air Force .
Brazil 's conscription policy gives it one of the world 's largest military forces , estimated at more than 1.6 million reservist annually .
The Navy once operated some of the most powerful warships in the world with the two Minas Geraes-class dreadnoughts , which sparked a South American dreadnought race between Argentina , Brazil , and Chile .
Today , it is a green water force and has a group of specialized elite in retaking ships and naval facilities , GRUMEC , unit specially trained to protect Brazilian oil platforms along its coast .
It 's the only navy in Latin America that operates an aircraft carrier , NAe São Paulo , and one of the ten navies of the world to operate this type of ship .
Brazil received an International Monetary Fund rescue package in mid-2002 of $ 30.4 billion , then a record sum .
Brazil 's central bank paid back the IMF loan in 2005 , although it was not due to be repaid until 2006 .
One of the issues the Central Bank of Brazil recently dealt with was an excess of speculative short-term capital inflows to the country , which may have contributed to a fall in the value of the U.S. dollar against the real during that period .
Nonetheless , foreign direct investment -LRB- FDI -RRB- , related to long-term , less speculative investment in production , is estimated to be $ 193.8 billion for 2007 .
Inflation monitoring and control currently plays a major part in the Central bank 's role of setting out short-term interest rates as a monetary policy measure .
Corruption costs Brazil almost $ 41 billion a year alone , with 69.9 % of the country 's firms identifying the issue as a major constraint in successfully penetrating the global market .
Local government corruption is so prevalent that voters perceive it as a problem only if it surpasses certain levels , and only if a local media e.g. a radio station is present to divulge the findings of corruption charges .
Initiatives , like this exposure , strengthen awareness which is indicated by the Transparency International 's Corruption Perceptions Index ; ranking Brazil 69th out of 178 countries in 2012 .
The purchasing power in Brazil is eroded by the so-called Brazil cost .
Tourism in Brazil is a growing sector and key to the economy of several regions of the country .
The country had 5 million visitors in 2010 , ranking in terms of international tourist arrivals as the second destination in South America , and third in Latin America after Mexico and Argentina .
Revenues from international tourists reached US$ 6 billion in 2010 , showing a recovery from the 2008 -- 2009 economic crisis .
Historical records of 5.4 million visitors and US$ 6.8 billion in receipts were reached in 2011 .
Bolivia and Paraguay have been given free ports at Santos .
Bulk carriers have to wait up to 18 days before being serviced , container ships 36,3 hours on average .
Higher education starts with undergraduate or sequential courses , which may offer different options of specialization in academic or professional careers .
Depending on the choice , students can improve their educational background with courses of post-graduate studies or broad sense .
To attend a higher education institution is required , by Law of Guidelines and Bases of Education , completing all levels of education suited to the needs of all students of teaching kindergarten , elementary and medium , provided the student does not hold any disability , whether physical , mental , visual or hearing .
Television in Brazil began officially on 18 September 1950 , with the founding of TV Tupi by Assis Chateaubriand .
Since then television has grown in the country , creating large public networks such as Globo , SBT , Record and Bandeirantes .
Today it is the most important factor in popular culture of Brazilian society , indicated by research showing that as much as 67 % of the general population follow the same daily soap opera broadcast .
Digital Television , using the SBTVD standard -LRB- based on the Japanese standard ISDB-T -RRB- , was adopted 29 June 2006 and launched on 2 November 2007 .
In May 2010 , Brazil launched TV Brasil Internacional , an international television station , initially broadcasting to 49 countries .
The WTO 's current Director-General is Roberto Azevêdo , who leads a staff of over 600 people in Geneva , Switzerland .
A trade facilitation agreement , part of the Bali Package of decisions , was agreed by all members on 7 December 2013 , the first comprehensive agreement in the organization 's history .
The ancient Indians were generally unconcerned with chronologies , being more focused on philosophy .
Buddhist texts reflect this tendency , providing a clearer picture of what Gautama may have taught than of the dates of the events in his life .
These texts contain descriptions of the culture and daily life of ancient India which can be corroborated from the Jain scriptures , and make the Buddha 's time the earliest period in Indian history for which significant accounts exist .
British author Karen Armstrong writes that although there is very little information that can be considered historically sound , we can be reasonably confident that Siddhārtha Gautama did exist as a historical figure .
Michael Carrithers goes a bit further by stating that the most general outline of `` birth , maturity , renunciation , search , awakening and liberation , teaching , death '' must be true .
Gautama was born as a Kshatriya , the son of Śuddhodana , `` an elected chief of the Shakya clan '' , whose capital was Kapilavastu , and who were later annexed by the growing Kingdom of Kosala during the Buddha 's lifetime .
Legend has it that , on the night Siddhartha was conceived , Queen Maya dreamt that a white elephant with six white tusks entered her right side , and ten months later Siddhartha was born .
As was the Shakya tradition , when his mother Queen Maya became pregnant , she left Kapilvastu for her father 's kingdom to give birth .
However , her son is said to have been born on the way , at Lumbini , in a garden beneath a sal tree .
Early texts suggest that Gautama was not familiar with the dominant religious teachings of his time until he left on his religious quest , which is said to have been motivated by existential concern for the human condition .
The state of the Shakya clan was not a monarchy , and seems to have been structured either as an oligarchy , or as a form of republic .
The more egalitarian gana-sangha form of government , as a political alternative to the strongly hierarchical kingdoms , may have influenced the development of the śramanic Jain and Buddhist sanghas , where monarchies tended toward Vedic Brahmanism .
Gautama initially went to Rajagaha and began his ascetic life by begging for alms in the street .
After King Bimbisara 's men recognised Siddhartha and the king learned of his quest , Bimbisara offered Siddhartha the throne .
Siddhartha rejected the offer , but promised to visit his kingdom of Magadha first , upon attaining enlightenment .
Scholars are hesitant to make unqualified claims about the historical facts of the Buddha 's life .
Apart from the Vedic Brahmins , the Buddha 's lifetime coincided with the flourishing of influential Śramaṇa schools of thought like Ājīvika , Cārvāka , Jainism , and Ajñana .
It was also the age of influential thinkers like Mahavira -LRB- referred to as ` Nigantha Nataputta ' in Pali Canon -RRB- -RRB- , Pūraṇa Kassapa , Makkhali Gosāla , Ajita Kesakambalī , Pakudha Kaccāyana , and Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta , as recorded in Samaññaphala Sutta , whose viewpoints the Buddha most certainly must have been acquainted with .
Indeed , Sariputta and Moggallāna , two of the foremost disciples of the Buddha , were formerly the foremost disciples of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta , the skeptic ; and the Pali canon frequently depicts Buddha engaging in debate with the adherents of rival schools of thoughts .
There is also evidence to suggest that the two masters , Alara Kalama and Uddaka Ramaputta , were indeed historical figures and they most probably taught Buddha two different forms of meditative techniques .
While the general sequence of `` birth , maturity , renunciation , search , awakening and liberation , teaching , death '' is widely accepted , there is less consensus on the veracity of many details contained in traditional biographies .
Weather warnings are important forecasts because they are used to protect life and property .
Temperature forecasts are used by utility companies to estimate demand over coming days .
On an everyday basis , people use weather forecasts to determine what to wear on a given day .
Since outdoor activities are severely curtailed by heavy rain , snow and the wind chill , forecasts can be used to plan activities around these events , and to plan ahead and survive them .
Yoga -LRB- / ˈjoʊɡə / ; Sanskrit , योग Listen -RRB- is a group of physical , mental , and spiritual practices or disciplines which originated in ancient India .
A yoga system that predated the Buddhist school is Jain yoga .
But since Jain sources postdate Buddhist ones , it is difficult to distinguish between the nature of the early Jain school and elements derived from other schools .
Most of the other contemporary yoga systems alluded in the Upanishads and some Pali canons are lost to time .
Yoga as a philosophy is mentioned in Sanskrit texts dated to be completed between 200 BCE -- 200 CE .
Kauṭilya 's Arthasastra in verse 1.2.10 , for example , states that there are three categories of anviksikis -LRB- philosophies -RRB- -- Samkhya -LRB- nontheistic -RRB- , Yoga -LRB- theistic -RRB- and Cārvāka -LRB- atheistic materialism -RRB- .
The Yoga Yajnavalkya is a classical treatise on yoga attributed to the Vedic sage Yajnavalkya .
The text contains 12 chapters and its origin has been traced to the period between the second century BCE and fourth century CE .
Many yoga texts like the Hatha Yoga Pradipika , the Yoga Kundalini and the Yoga Tattva Upanishads have borrowed verses from or make frequent references to the Yoga Yajnavalkya .
The Yoga Yajnavalkya discusses eight yoga Asanas -- Swastika , Gomukha , Padma , Vira , Simha , Bhadra , Mukta and Mayura , numerous breathing exercises for body cleansing , and meditation .
Yoga has also been studied as a treatment for schizophrenia .
Some encouraging , but inconclusive , evidence suggests that yoga as a complementary treatment may help alleviate symptoms of schizophrenia and improve health-related quality of life .
A small percentage of yoga practitioners each year suffer physical injuries analogous to sports injuries ; therefore , caution and common sense are recommended .
Yoga has been criticized for being potentially dangerous and being a cause for a range of serious medical conditions including thoracic outlet syndrome , degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine , spinal stenosis , retinal tears , damage to the common fibular nerve , `` Yoga foot drop , '' etc. .
An exposé of these problems by William Broad published in January , 2012 in The New York Times Magazine resulted in controversy within the international yoga community .
Broad , a science writer , yoga practitioner , and author of The Science of Yoga : The Risks and the Rewards , had suffered a back injury while performing a yoga posture .
Torn muscles , knee injuries , and headaches are common ailments which may result from yoga practice .
Each planet 's movement is perturbed by the gravity of every other planet .
This leads to short-term fluctuations in its speed , and therefore its period from year to year .
No astronomical year has an integer number of days or lunar months , so any calendar that follows an astronomical year must have a system of intercalation such as leap years .
Financial and scientific calculations often use a 365-day calendar to simplify daily rates .
In 1985 , a dramatic change began .
Finance officials from major nations signed an agreement -LRB- the Plaza Accord -RRB- affirming that the dollar was overvalued -LRB- and , therefore , the yen undervalued -RRB- .
This agreement , and shifting supply and demand pressures in the markets , led to a rapid rise in the value of the yen .
From its average of ¥ 239 per US$ 1 in 1985 , the yen rose to a peak of ¥ 128 in 1988 , virtually doubling its value relative to the dollar .
In April 1995 , the yen hit a peak of under 80 yen per dollar , temporarily making Japan 's economy nearly the size of the US .
The special drawing rights -LRB- SDR -RRB- valuation is an IMF basket of currencies , including the Japanese yen .
The SDR is linked to a basket of currencies with 41.9 % for the U.S. dollar , 37.4 % for the euro , 11.3 % for the pound sterling , and 9.4 % for the yen -LRB- as of 2011 -RRB- .
The percentage for the yen has however declined from 18 % in 2000 .
The exchange rate for the Japanese yen is expressed in terms of currency units per U.S. dollar ; other rates are expressed as U.S. dollars per currency unit .
The SDR currency value is calculated daily and the valuation basket is reviewed and adjusted every five years .
The SDR was created in 1969 , to support the fixed exchange system .
In 1430 , the new Xuande Emperor appointed Zheng He to command over a seventh and final expedition into the `` Western Ocean '' -LRB- Indian Ocean -RRB- .
In 1431 , Zheng He was bestowed with the title `` Sanbao Taijian '' , using his informal name Sanbao and characters meaning `` Three Treasures '' .
Zheng He led seven expeditions to the `` Western '' or Indian Ocean .
Zheng He brought back to China many trophies and envoys from more than thirty kingdoms -- including King Vira Alakeshwara of Ceylon , who came to China as a captive to apologize to the Emperor for offenses against his mission .
There is little attempt to provide an accurate 2-D representation ; instead the sailing instructions are given using a 24-point compass system with a Chinese symbol for each point , together with a sailing time or distance , which takes account of the local currents and winds .
Of 300 named places outside China , more than 80 % can be confidently located .
The magnetic field at any given point is specified by both a direction and a magnitude -LRB- or strength -RRB- ; as such it is represented by a vector field .
The term is used for two distinct but closely related fields denoted by the symbols B and H , where H is measured in units of amperes per meter -LRB- symbol : A ⋅ m − 1 or A/m -RRB- in the SI .
B is measured in teslas -LRB- symbol : T -RRB- and newtons per meter per ampere -LRB- symbol : N ⋅ m − 1 ⋅ A − 1 or N / -LRB- m ⋅ A -RRB- -RRB- in the SI .
B is most commonly defined in terms of the Lorentz force it exerts on moving electric charges .
After Ørsted discovered that electric currents produce a magnetic field and Ampere discovered that electric currents attracted and repelled each other similar to magnets , it was natural to hypothesize that all magnetic fields are due to electric current loops .
In this model developed by Ampere , the elementary magnetic dipole that makes up all magnets is a sufficiently small Amperian loop of current I .
Most materials respond to an applied B-field by producing their own magnetization M and therefore their own B-field .
Typically , the response is weak and exists only when the magnetic field is applied .
The term magnetism describes how materials respond on the microscopic level to an applied magnetic field and is used to categorize the magnetic phase of a material .
Materials are divided into groups based upon their magnetic behavior :
Most cotton in the United States , Europe and Australia is harvested mechanically , either by a cotton picker , a machine that removes the cotton from the boll without damaging the cotton plant , or by a cotton stripper , which strips the entire boll off the plant .
Cotton strippers are used in regions where it is too windy to grow picker varieties of cotton , and usually after application of a chemical defoliant or the natural defoliation that occurs after a freeze .
Cotton is a perennial crop in the tropics , and without defoliation or freezing , the plant will continue to grow .
Cotton lisle is a finely-spun , tightly twisted type of cotton that is noted for being strong and durable .
Lisle is composed of two strands that have each been twisted an extra twist per inch than ordinary yarns and combined to create a single thread .
The yarn is spun so that it is compact and solid .
This cotton is used mainly for underwear , stockings , and gloves .
Colors applied to this yarn are noted for being more brilliant than colors applied to softer yarn .
This type of thread was first made in the city of Lisle , France -LRB- now Lille -RRB- , hence its name .
Small lymphatic networks called plexuses exist beneath each of the three layers of the heart .
These networks collect into a main left and a main right trunk , which travel up the groove between the ventricles that exists on the heart 's surface , receiving smaller vessels as they travel up .
These vessels then travel into the atrioventricular groove , and receive a third vessel which drains the section of the left ventricle sitting on the diaphragm .
The left vessel joins with this third vessel , and travels along the pulmonary artery and left atrium , ending in the inferior tracheobronchial node .
The right vessel travels along the right atrium and the part of the right ventricle sitting on the diaphragm .
The sinoatrial node is found in the upper part of the right atrium near to the junction with the superior vena cava .
The electrical signal generated by the sinoatrial node travels through the right atrium in a radial way that is not completely understood .
The signal then travels to the atrioventricular node .
This is found at the bottom of the right atrium in the atrioventricular septum -- the boundary between the right atrium and the left ventricle .
The septum is part of the cardiac skeleton , tissue within the heart that the electrical signal can not pass through , which forces the signal to pass through the atrioventricular node only .
The signal then travels along the bundle of His to left and right bundle branches through to the ventricles of the heart .
In the ventricles the signal is carried by specialized tissue called the Purkinje fibers which then transmit the electric charge to the heart muscle .
The normal sinus rhythm of the heart , giving the resting heart rate , is influenced a number of factors .
The cardiovascular centres in the brainstem that control the sympathetic and parasympathetic influences to the heart through the vagus nerve and sympathetic trunk .
These cardiovascular centres receive input from a series of receptors including baroreceptors , sensing stretch the stretching of blood vessels and chemoreceptors , sensing the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood and its pH. Through a series of reflexes these help regulate and sustain blood flow .
Diseases may also affect the pericardium which surrounds the heart , which when inflammed is called pericarditis .
This inflammation affects the ability of the heart to pump effectively .
When fluid builds up in the pericardium this is called pericardial effusion , which when it causes acute heart failure is called cardiac tamponade .
This can compress the heart and adversely affect the function of the heart .
The fluid can be removed from the pericardial sac using a syringe in a procedure called pericardiocentesis .
By the middle of the 20th century , heart disease had surpassed infectious disease as the leading cause of death in the United States , and it is currently the leading cause of deaths worldwide .
Since 1948 , the ongoing Framingham Heart Study has shed light on the effects of various influences on the heart , including diet , exercise , and common medications such as aspirin .
Although the introduction of ACE inhibitors and beta blockers has improved the management of chronic heart failure , the disease continues to be an enormous medical and societal burden , with 30 to 40 % of patients dying within a year of receiving the diagnosis .
The heart has four valves , which separate its chambers .
One valve lies between each atrium and ventricle , and one valve rests at the exit of each ventricle .
The hearts of beef , pork , and mutton can generally be interchanged in recipes .
Another way of dealing with toughness is to julienne the meat , as in Chinese stir-fried heart .
In reptiles , the heart is usually situated around the middle of the thorax , and in snakes , usually between the junction of the upper first and second third .
The ventricle is incompletely separated into two halves by a wall -LRB- septum -RRB- , with a considerable gap near the pulmonary artery and aortic openings .
In most reptilian species , there appears to be little , if any , mixing between the bloodstreams , so the aorta receives , essentially , only oxygenated blood .
Because wheat self-pollinates , creating hybrid varieties is extremely labor-intensive ; the high cost of hybrid wheat seed relative to its moderate benefits have kept farmers from adopting them widely despite nearly 90 years of effort .
F1 hybrid wheat cultivars should not be confused with wheat cultivars deriving from standard plant breeding .
Heterosis or hybrid vigor -LRB- as in the familiar F1 hybrids of maize -RRB- occurs in common -LRB- hexaploid -RRB- wheat , but it is difficult to produce seed of hybrid cultivars on a commercial scale as is done with maize because wheat flowers are perfect in the botanical sense , meaning they have both male and female parts , and normally self-pollinate .
Commercial hybrid wheat seed has been produced using chemical hybridizing agents , plant growth regulators that selectively interfere with pollen development , or naturally occurring cytoplasmic male sterility systems .
Hard Red Spring -- Hard , brownish , high-protein wheat used for bread and hard baked goods .
Bread Flour and high-gluten flours are commonly made from hard red spring wheat .
Wheat is grown on more than 218,000,000 hectares -LRB- 540,000,000 acres -RRB- , larger than for any other crop .
In addition to agronomic adaptability , wheat offers ease of grain storage and ease of converting grain into flour for making edible , palatable , interesting and satisfying foods .
Cultivation of wheat began to spread beyond the Fertile Crescent after about 8000 BCE .
Jared Diamond traces the spread of cultivated emmer wheat starting in the Fertile Crescent sometime before 8800 BCE .
Archaeological analysis of wild emmer indicates that it was first cultivated in the southern Levant with finds dating back as far as 9600 BCE .
Genetic analysis of wild einkorn wheat suggests that it was first grown in the Karacadag Mountains in southeastern Turkey .
Dated archeological remains of einkorn wheat in settlement sites near this region , including those at Abu Hureyra in Syria , suggest the domestication of einkorn near the Karacadag Mountain Range .
With the anomalous exception of two grains from Iraq ed-Dubb , the earliest carbon-14 date for einkorn wheat remains at Abu Hureyra is 7800 to 7500 years BCE .
In the past , there has been significant governmental intervention in wheat markets , such as price supports in the US and farm payments in the EU .
In the EU , these subsidies have encouraged heavy use of fertilizer inputs with resulting high crop yields .
In March 1991 , Mikhail Gorbachev , the president of the Soviet Union , proposed a federation by holding a referendum to preserve the Union as the Union of Sovereign States .
The new treaty signing never happened as the Communist Party hardliners staged an attempted coup in August that year .
Russia has been urging that the Russian language receive official status in all of the CIS member states .
Russian is also considered an official language in the region of Transnistria , and the autonomous region of Gagauzia in Moldova .
Viktor Yanukovych , the Moscow-supported presidential candidate in the controversial 2004 Ukrainian presidential election , declared his intention to make Russian an official second language of Ukraine .
After his early 2010 election as President Yanukovych stated -LRB- on 9 March 2010 -RRB- that `` Ukraine will continue to promote the Ukrainian language as its only state language '' .
On 21 December 1991 , the leaders of eight additional former Soviet Republics -- Armenia , Azerbaijan , Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Moldova , Turkmenistan , Tajikistan , and Uzbekistan -- signed the Alma-Ata Protocol which can either be interpreted as expanding the CIS to these states or the proper foundation or refoundation date of the CIS , thus bringing the number of participating countries to 11 .
Georgia joined two years later , in December 1993 .
At this point , 12 of the 15 former Soviet Republics participated in the CIS .
The three Baltic states did not , reflecting their governments ' view that the post-1940 Soviet occupation of their territory was illegitimate -LRB- in 2004 they joined NATO and the European Union -RRB- .
The Creation Agreement remained the main constituent document of the CIS until January 1993 , when the CIS Charter -LRB- Russian : Устав , Ustav -RRB- was adopted .
The charter formalised the concept of membership : a member country is defined as a country that ratifies the CIS Charter -LRB- sec .
Bread is a staple food prepared from a dough of flour and water , usually by baking .
Glutenin and gliadin are functional proteins found in wheat bread that contribute to the structure of bread .
Gliadin binds weakly to the gluten network established by glutenin via intrachain disulfide bonds .
Structurally , bread can be defined as an elastic-plastic foam .
The glutenin protein contributes to its elastic nature , as it is able to regain its initial shape after deformation .
The gliadin protein contributes to its plastic nature , because it demonstrates non-reversible structural change after a certain amount of applied force .
Because air pockets within this gluten network result from carbon dioxide production during leavening , bread can be defined as a foam , or a gas-in-solid solution .
Wheat flour , in addition to its starch , contains three water-soluble protein groups -LRB- albumin , globulin , and proteoses -RRB- and two water-insoluble protein groups -LRB- glutenin and gliadin -RRB- .
When flour is mixed with water , the water-soluble proteins dissolve , leaving the glutenin and gliadin to form the structure of the resulting bread .
When relatively dry dough is worked by kneading , or wet dough is allowed to rise for a long time -LRB- see no-knead bread -RRB- , the glutenin forms strands of long , thin , chainlike molecules , while the shorter gliadin forms bridges between the strands of glutenin .
The resulting networks of strands produced by these two proteins are known as gluten .
Gluten development improves if the dough is allowed to autolyse .
The baker 's yeast and sourdough methods follow the same pattern .
Water is mixed with flour , salt and the leavening agent .
Other additions -LRB- spices , herbs , fats , seeds , fruit , etc. -RRB- are not needed to bake bread , but are often used .
The mixed dough is then allowed to rise one or more times -LRB- a longer rising time results in more flavor , so bakers often `` punch down '' the dough and let it rise again -RRB- , then loaves are formed , and -LRB- after an optional final rising time -RRB- the bread is baked in an oven .
Many breads are made from a `` straight dough '' , which means that all of the ingredients are combined in one step , and the dough is baked after the rising time ; others are made from a `` pre-ferment '' in which the leavening agent is combined with some of the flour and water a day or so ahead of baking and allowed to ferment overnight .
On the day of baking , the rest of the ingredients are added , and the process continues as with straight dough .
This produces a more flavorful bread with better texture .
Many bakers see the starter method as a compromise between the reliable results of baker 's yeast and the flavor and complexity of a longer fermentation .
It also allows the baker to use only a minimal amount of baker 's yeast , which was scarce and expensive when it first became available .
Most yeasted pre-ferments fall into one of three categories : `` poolish '' or `` pouliche '' , a loose-textured mixture composed of roughly equal amounts of flour and water -LRB- by weight -RRB- ; `` biga '' , a stiff mixture with a higher proportion of flour ; and `` pâte fermentée '' , which is simply a portion of dough reserved from a previous batch .
`` Id '' , `` ego '' , and `` super-ego '' are the three parts of the `` psychic apparatus '' defined in Sigmund Freud 's structural model of the psyche ; they are the three theoretical constructs in terms of whose activity and interaction mental life is described .
Scholars in this interdisciplinary area are typically either psychologists or sociologists , though all social psychologists employ both the individual and the group as their units of analysis .
In the `` Definitions '' chapter of Jung 's seminal work Psychological Types , under the definition of `` collective '' Jung references representations collectives , a term coined by Lucien Lévy-Bruhl in his 1910 book How Natives Think .
Jung says this is what he describes as the collective unconscious .
Freud , on the other hand , did not accept the idea of a collective unconscious .
In 2006 , scientists researching the ancestry of birds `` turned on '' a chicken recessive gene , talpid2 , and found that the embryo jaws initiated formation of teeth , like those found in ancient bird fossils .
John Fallon , the overseer of the project , stated that chickens have '' ... retained the ability to make teeth , under certain conditions ... . ''
Genetic studies have pointed to multiple maternal origins in Southeast Asia , East Asia , and South Asia , but with the clade found in the Americas , Europe , the Middle East and Africa originating in the Indian subcontinent .
From India , the domesticated chicken was imported to Lydia in western Asia Minor , and to Greece by the fifth century BC .
Fowl had been known in Egypt since the mid-15th century BC , with the `` bird that gives birth every day '' having come to Egypt from the land between Syria and Shinar , Babylonia , according to the annals of Thutmose III .
According to Columella -LRB- De Re Rustica 8.2.7 -RRB- , the ideal flock consists of 200 birds , which can be supervised by one person if someone is watching for stray animals .
White chickens should be avoided as they are not very fertile and are easily caught by eagles or goshawks .
One cock should be kept for five hens .
In the case of Rhodian and Median cocks that are very heavy and therefore not much inclined to sex , only three hens are kept per cock .
A hen can hatch no more than 15-23 eggs , depending on the time of year , and supervise no more than 30 hatchlings .
Eggs that are long and pointed give more male , rounded eggs mainly female hatchlings -LRB- De Re Rustica 8.5.11 -RRB- .
Copolymers can undergo microphase separation to form a diverse array of periodic nanostructures , as shown in the example of the styrene-butadiene-styrene block copolymer shown at right .
However , because the blocks are covalently bonded to each other , they can not demix macroscopically as water and oil can , and so instead the blocks form nanometer-sized structures .
Ionic liquids also display microphase separation .
The anion and cation are not necessarily compatible and would demix otherwise , but electric charge attraction prevents them from separating .
Their anions and cations appear to diffuse within compartmentalized layers or micelles instead of freely as in a uniform liquid .
At high densities but relatively low temperatures , quarks are theorized to form a quark liquid whose nature is presently unknown .
These phases may occur in neutron stars but they are presently theoretical .
Similar to a superfluid , a supersolid is able to move without friction but retains a rigid shape .
Although a supersolid is a solid , it exhibits so many characteristic properties different from other solids that many argue it is another state of matter .
High elevations on mountains produce colder climates than at sea level .
These colder climates strongly affect the ecosystems of mountains : different elevations have different plants and animals .
Because of the less hospitable terrain and climate , mountains tend to be used less for agriculture and more for resource extraction and recreation , such as mountain climbing .
Mosquito mouthparts are very specialized , particularly those of the females , which in most species are adapted to piercing skin and then sucking blood .
Apart from bloodsucking , the females generally also drink assorted fluids rich in dissolved sugar , such as nectar and honeydew , to obtain the energy they need .
In contrast , male mosquitoes are not bloodsuckers ; they only drink sugary fluids .
Accordingly , their mouthparts do not require the same degree of specialization as those of females .
Many even tolerate subzero temperatures .
In addition , adults of some species can survive the winter by taking shelter in suitable microhabitats such as buildings or hollow trees .
The fall of the Roman Empire in the 5th century A.D. saw the decline of the culture of ancient Rome .
Papyrus became difficult to obtain due to lack of contact with Egypt , and parchment , which had been used for centuries , became the main writing material .
Parchment is a material made from processed animal skin and used -- mainly in the past -- for writing on .
Parchment is most commonly made of calfskin , sheepskin , or goatskin .
Parchment is limed , scraped and dried under tension .
A make-ready is the preparatory work carried out by the pressmen to get the printing press up to the required quality of impression .
Included in make-ready is the time taken to mount the plate onto the machine , clean up any mess from the previous job , and get the press up to speed .
As soon as the pressman decides that the printing is correct , all the make-ready sheets will be discarded , and the press will start making books .
Similar make readies take place in the folding and binding areas , each involving spoilage of paper .
`` Making cases '' happens off-line and prior to the book 's arrival at the binding line .
In the most basic case-making , two pieces of cardboard are placed onto a glued piece of cloth with a space between them into which is glued a thinner board cut to the width of the spine of the book .
The overlapping edges of the cloth -LRB- about 5/8 '' all round -RRB- are folded over the boards , and pressed down to adhere .
After case-making the stack of cases will go to the foil stamping area for adding decorations and type .
The size of a modern book is based on the printing area of a common flatbed press .
The pages of type were arranged and clamped in a frame , so that when printed on a sheet of paper the full size of the press , the pages would be right side up and in order when the sheet was folded , and the folded edges trimmed .
Comic books or graphic novels are books in which the story is illustrated .
The characters and narrators use speech or thought bubbles to express verbal language .
When writing systems were created in ancient civilizations , a variety of objects , such as stone , clay , tree bark , metal sheets , might be used for writing .
The study of such inscriptions forms a major part of history .
The study of inscriptions is known as epigraphy .
Alphabetic writing emerged in Egypt .
The Ancient Egyptians would often write on papyrus , a plant grown along the Nile River .
At first the words were not separated from each other -LRB- scriptura continua -RRB- and there was no punctuation .
Texts were written from right to left , left to right , or even so that alternate lines read in opposite directions .
The technical term for that last type of writing is ` boustrophedon ' , which means literally ` ox-turning ' for the way a farmer drives an ox to plough his fields .
Books for recording periodic entries by the user , such as daily information about a journey , are called logbooks or simply logs .
A similar book for writing the owner 's daily private personal events , information , and ideas is called a diary or personal journal .
Commercial publishers in industrialized countries generally assign ISBNs to their books , so buyers may presume that the ISBN is part of a total international system , with no exceptions .
However , many government publishers , in industrial as well as developing countries , do not participate fully in the ISBN system , and publish books which do not have ISBNs .
A large or public collection requires a catalogue .
Codes called `` call numbers '' relate the books to the catalogue , and determine their locations on the shelves .
Call numbers are based on a Library classification system .
The call number is placed on the spine of the book , normally a short distance before the bottom , and inside .
Institutional or national standards , such as ANSI/NISO Z39 .41 - 1997 , establish the correct way to place information -LRB- such as the title , or the name of the author -RRB- on book spines , and on `` shelvable '' book-like objects , such as containers for DVDs , video tapes and software .
Paper made from wood pulp became popular in the early 20th century , because it was cheaper than linen or abaca cloth-based papers .
Pulp-based paper made books less expensive to the general public .
This paved the way for huge leaps in the rate of literacy in industrialised nations , and enabled the spread of information during the Second Industrial Revolution .
The HVAC system should be up to date and functioning efficiently .
Therefore , care should be given to the collections by implementing light control .
General housekeeping issues can be addressed , including pest control .
In addition to these helpful solutions , a library must also make an effort to be prepared if a disaster occurs , one that they can not control .
Time and effort should be given to create a concise and effective disaster plan to counteract any damage incurred through `` acts of God '' therefore an emergency management plan should be in place .
Orthodox scholars , however , oppose these hypotheses .
One of the main arguments of these scholars is that Ovid would not let his Fasti remain unfinished , mainly because this poem meant his consecration as an imperial poet .
In analyzing the Metamorphoses , scholars have focused on Ovid 's organization of his vast body of material .
The ways that stories are linked by geography , themes , or contrasts creates interesting effects and constantly forces the reader to evaluate the connections .
Ovid also varies his tone and material from different literary genres ; G. B. Conte has called the poem `` a sort of gallery of these various literary genres . ''
In this spirit , Ovid engages creatively with his predecessors , alluding creatively to the full spectrum of classical poetry .
Ovid 's use of Alexandrian epic , or elegiac couplets , shows his fusion of erotic and psychological style with traditional forms of epic .
According to Seneca the Elder , Ovid tended to the emotional , not the argumentative pole of rhetoric .
After the death of his brother at 20 years of age , Ovid renounced law and began travelling to Athens , Asia Minor , and Sicily .
He held minor public posts , as one of the tresviri capitales , as a member of the Centumviral court and as one of the decemviri litibus iudicandis , but resigned to pursue poetry probably around 29 -- 25 BC , a decision his father apparently disapproved of .
-LRB- 1820s -RRB- During his Odessa exile , Alexander Pushkin compared himself to Ovid ; memorably versified in the epistle To Ovid -LRB- 1821 -RRB- .
The exiled Ovid also features in his long poem Gypsies , set in Moldavia -LRB- 1824 -RRB- , and in Canto VIII of Eugene Onegin -LRB- 1825 -- 1832 -RRB- .
-LRB- 2006 -RRB- American musician Bob Dylan 's album Modern Times contains songs with borrowed lines from Ovid 's Poems of Exile , from Peter Green 's translation .
During the remainder of the summer , Stravinsky turned his attention to completing his first opera , The Nightingale -LRB- usually known by its French title Le Rossignol -RRB- , which he had begun in 1908 -LRB- that is , before his association with the Ballets Russes -RRB- .
The work had been commissioned by the Moscow Free Theatre for the handsome fee of 10,000 roubles .
Stravinsky proved adept at playing the part of a ` man of the world ' , acquiring a keen instinct for business matters and appearing relaxed and comfortable in public .
His successful career as a pianist and conductor took him to many of the world 's major cities , including Paris , Venice , Berlin , London , Amsterdam and New York and he was known for his polite , courteous and helpful manner .
Stravinsky was reputed to have been a philanderer and was rumoured to have had affairs with high-profile partners , such as Coco Chanel .
He never referred to it himself , but Chanel spoke about the alleged affair at length to her biographer Paul Morand in 1946 ; the conversation was published thirty years later .
The accuracy of Chanel 's claims has been disputed by both Stravinsky 's widow , Vera , and by Craft .
Chanel 's fashion house avers there is no evidence that any affair between Chanel and Stravinsky ever occurred .
A fictionalization of the supposed affair formed the basis of the novel Coco and Igor -LRB- 2002 -RRB- and a film , Coco Chanel & Igor Stravinsky -LRB- 2009 -RRB- .
Despite these alleged liaisons , Stravinsky was considered a family man and devoted to his children .
In 1935 , the American composer Marc Blitzstein compared Stravinsky to Jacopo Peri and C.P.E. Bach , conceding that , `` there is no denying the greatness of Stravinsky .
Blitzstein 's Marxist position was that Stravinsky 's wish to `` divorce music from other streams of life '' , which is `` symptomatic of an escape from reality '' , resulted in a `` loss of stamina '' , naming specifically Apollo , the Capriccio , and Le Baiser de la fée .
In some cultures , sumptuary laws regulate what men and women are required to wear .
Islam requires women to wear more modest forms of attire , usually hijab .
What qualifies as `` modest '' varies in different Muslim societies .
Articles of clothing Muslim women wear for modesty range from the head-scarf to the burqa .
The game is played on a field whose primary boundaries , the foul lines , extend forward from home plate at 45-degree angles .
The 90-degree area within the foul lines is referred to as fair territory ; the 270-degree area outside them is foul territory .
The part of the field enclosed by the bases and several yards beyond them is the infield ; the area farther beyond the infield is the outfield .
In the middle of the infield is a raised pitcher 's mound , with a rectangular rubber plate -LRB- the rubber -RRB- at its center .
The outer boundary of the outfield is typically demarcated by a raised fence , which may be of any material and height -LRB- many amateur games are played on unfenced fields -RRB- .
Fair territory between home plate and the outfield boundary is baseball 's field of play , though significant events can take place in foul territory , as well .
Play starts with a batter standing at home plate , holding a bat .
The batter waits for the pitcher to throw a pitch -LRB- the ball -RRB- toward home plate , and attempts to hit the ball with the bat .
A player who reaches base due to a fielding mistake is not credited with a hit -- instead , the responsible fielder is charged with an error .
The catcher catches pitches that the batter does not hit -- as a result of either electing not to swing or failing to connect -- and returns them to the pitcher .
A batter who hits the ball into the field of play must drop the bat and begin running toward first base , at which point the player is referred to as a runner -LRB- or , until the play is over , a batter-runner -RRB- .
A batter-runner who reaches first base without being put out -LRB- see below -RRB- is said to be safe and is now on base .
A batter-runner may choose to remain at first base or attempt to advance to second base or even beyond -- however far the player believes can be reached safely .
A player who reaches base despite proper play by the fielders has recorded a hit .
A player who reaches first base safely on a hit is credited with a single .
If the ball is hit in the air within the foul lines over the entire outfield -LRB- and outfield fence , if there is one -RRB- , it is a home run : the batter and any runners on base may all freely circle the bases , each scoring a run .
Similarly , there are no regulations at all concerning the dimensions of foul territory .
The area out-of-bounds on a football or soccer field does not affect play the way foul territory in baseball does , so variations in that regard are largely insignificant .
A fence in foul territory that is close to the outfield line will tend to direct balls that strike it back toward the fielders , while one that is farther away may actually prompt more collisions , as outfielders run full speed to field balls deep in the corner .
These variations can make the difference between a double and a triple or inside-the-park home run .
While the adjacent image shows a traditional field surfacing arrangement -LRB- and the one used by virtually all MLB teams with naturally surfaced fields -RRB- , teams are free to decide what areas will be grassed or bare .
Some fields -- including several in MLB -- use an artificial surface , such as AstroTurf .
Surface variations can have a significant effect on how ground balls behave and are fielded as well as on baserunning .
Similarly , the presence of a roof -LRB- seven major league teams play in stadiums with permanent or retractable roofs -RRB- can greatly affect how fly balls are played .
While football and soccer players deal with similar variations of field surface and stadium covering , the size and shape of their fields are much more standardized .
At the phase transition region where hydrogen -- heated beyond its critical point -- becomes metallic , it is calculated the temperature is 10,000 K -LRB- 9,700 ° C ; 17,500 ° F -RRB- and the pressure is 200 GPa .
The temperature at the core boundary is estimated to be 36,000 K -LRB- 35,700 ° C ; 64,300 ° F -RRB- and the interior pressure is roughly 3,000 -- 4,500 GPa .
White ovals tend to consist of relatively cool clouds within the upper atmosphere .
Such storms can last as little as a few hours or stretch on for centuries .
The Red Spot was reportedly lost from sight on several occasions between 1665 and 1708 before becoming quite conspicuous in 1878 .
Beginning in 1973 , several spacecraft have performed planetary flyby maneuvers that brought them within observation range of Jupiter .
They discovered that the radiation fields near the planet were much stronger than expected , but both spacecraft managed to survive in that environment .
The trajectories of these spacecraft were used to refine the mass estimates of the Jovian system .
Radio occultations by the planet resulted in better measurements of Jupiter 's diameter and the amount of polar flattening .
Data from this mission revealed that hydrogen composes up to 90 % of Jupiter 's atmosphere .
The recorded temperature was more than 300 ° C -LRB- > 570 ° F -RRB- and the windspeed measured more than 644 km/h -LRB- > 400 mph -RRB- before the probes vapourised .
The eccentricity of their orbits causes regular flexing of the three moons ' shapes , with Jupiter 's gravity stretching them out as they approach it and allowing them to spring back to more spherical shapes as they swing away .
This tidal flexing heats the moons ' interiors by friction .
This is seen most dramatically in the extraordinary volcanic activity of innermost Io -LRB- which is subject to the strongest tidal forces -RRB- , and to a lesser degree in the geological youth of Europa 's surface -LRB- indicating recent resurfacing of the moon 's exterior -RRB- .
Phytolith discoveries in Cameroon dating to the first millennium BCE triggered an as yet unresolved debate about the date of first cultivation in Africa .
There is linguistic evidence that bananas were known in Madagascar around that time .
The earliest prior evidence indicates that cultivation dates to no earlier than late 6th century CE .
It is likely , however , that bananas were brought at least to Madagascar if not to the East African coast during the phase of Malagasy colonization of the island from South East Asia c. 400 CE .
Carbon dioxide -LRB- which bananas produce -RRB- and ethylene absorbents extend fruit life even at high temperatures .
This effect can be exploited by packing banana in a polyethylene bag and including an ethylene absorbent , e.g. , potassium permanganate , on an inert carrier .
The bag is then sealed with a band or string .
This treatment has been shown to more than double lifespans up to 3 -- 4 weeks without the need for refrigeration .
Panama disease is caused by a fusarium soil fungus -LRB- Race 1 -RRB- , which enters the plants through the roots and travels with water into the trunk and leaves , producing gels and gums that cut off the flow of water and nutrients , causing the plant to wilt , and exposing the rest of the plant to lethal amounts of sunlight .
Prior to 1960 , almost all commercial banana production centered on `` Gros Michel '' , which was highly susceptible .
Cavendish was chosen as the replacement for Gros Michel because , among resistant cultivars , it produces the highest quality fruit .
However , more care is required for shipping the Cavendish , and its quality compared to Gros Michel is debated .
The fruit has been described as a `` leathery berry '' .
The inner part of the common yellow dessert variety can be split lengthwise into three sections that correspond to the inner portions of the three carpels by manually deforming the unopened fruit .
In cultivated varieties , the seeds are diminished nearly to non-existence ; their remnants are tiny black specks in the interior of the fruit .
The genus Musa was created by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 .
The name may be derived from Antonius Musa , physician to the Emperor Augustus , or Linnaeus may have adapted the Arabic word for banana , mauz .
Rodovia Ayrton Senna/SP -70 -LRB- Ayrton Senna Highway -RRB- -- named after Brazilian legendary Formula One driver Ayrton Senna , the motorway connects São Paulo to east locations of the state , as well as the north coast of the state .
Luz is the seat of the Santos-Jundiaí line which historically transported international immigrants from the Santos port to São Paulo and the coffee plantation lands in the Western region of Campinas .
The city has 379 kilometres -LRB- 235 mi -RRB- of rail operated by three companies .
The São Paulo Metro operates 69.0 km -LRB- 42.9 mi -RRB- of underground railway systems -LRB- 34.6 km -LRB- 21.5 mi -RRB- fully underground -RRB- locally known as the Metrô -RRB- , with 5 lines in operation and 60 stations .
Companhia Paulista de Trens Metropolitanos -LRB- CPTM , or `` Paulista Company of Metropolitan Trains '' -RRB- railway add 260.7 km -LRB- 162.0 mi -RRB- .
The third company is Via4 , which operates the new Line 4 -LRB- São Paulo Metro -RRB- .
The underground and railway lines carry some 7 million people on an average weekday together .
The projects would expand São Paulo 's urban railway system from the current 322 km -LRB- 200 mi -RRB- to more than 500 km -LRB- 310 mi -RRB- , surpassing the London Underground .
The São Paulo Indy 300 was an IndyCar Series race in Santana that ran annually from 2010 to 2013 .
The event was removed from the 2014 season calendar .
Because São Paulo has urban sprawl , it uses a different definition for its metropolitan area called Expanded Metropolitan Complex of São Paulo .
Analogous to the BosWash definition , it is one of the largest urban agglomerations in the world , with 32 million inhabitants , behind Tokyo , which includes 4 contiguous legally defined metropolitan regions and 3 microregions .
Cidade Jardim was opened in São Paulo in 2008 , it is a 45,000-square-metre -LRB- 484,376-square-foot -RRB- mall , landscaped with trees and greenery scenario , with a focus on Brazilian brands but also home to international luxury brands such as Hermès , Jimmy Choo , Pucci and Carolina Herrera .
Opened in 2012 , JK shopping mall has brought to Brazil brands that were not present in the country before such as Goyard , Tory Burch , Llc. , Prada , and Miu Miu .
That zoning , adopted in 1972 , designated `` Z1 '' areas -LRB- residential areas designed for elites -RRB- and `` Z3 '' -LRB- a `` mixed zone '' lacking clear definitions about their characteristics -RRB- .
Zoning encouraged the growth of suburbs with minimal control and major speculation .
Rodovia Castelo Branco/SP -280 -LRB- President Castelo Branco Highway -RRB- -- connects São Paulo to the west and north-west of the country .
Basketball 's early adherents were dispatched to YMCAs throughout the United States , and it quickly spread through the USA and Canada .
While the YMCA was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game , within a decade it discouraged the new sport , as rough play and rowdy crowds began to detract from the YMCA 's primary mission .
In the years before World War I , the Amateur Athletic Union and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States -LRB- forerunner of the NCAA -RRB- vied for control over the rules for the game .
The first pro league , the National Basketball League , was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game .
This league only lasted five years .
A team can score a field goal by shooting the ball through the basket being defended by the opposition team during regular play .
A field goal scores three points for the shooting team if the player shoots from behind the three-point line , and two points if shot from in front of the line .
A team can also score via free throws , which are worth one point , after the other team is assessed with certain fouls .
The team with the most points at the end of the game wins , but additional time -LRB- overtime -RRB- is mandated when the score is tied at the end of regulation .
The ball can be advanced on the court by passing it to a teammate , or by bouncing it while walking or running -LRB- dribbling -RRB- .
It is a violation to lift , or drag , one 's pivot foot without dribbling the ball , to carry it , or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling .
The NBA-backed Women 's National Basketball Association -LRB- WNBA -RRB- began in 1997 .
Though it had shaky attendance figures , several marquee players -LRB- Lisa Leslie , Diana Taurasi , and Candace Parker among others -RRB- have helped the league 's popularity and level of competition .
In a March 12 , 2009 article , NBA commissioner David Stern said that in the bad economy , `` the NBA is far less profitable than the WNBA .
We 're losing a lot of money among a large number of teams .
We 're budgeting the WNBA to break even this year . ''
The WNBA has been looked at by many as a niche league .
However , the league has recently taken steps forward .
In June 2007 , the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN .
The new television deal runs from 2009 to 2016 .
Along with this deal , came the first ever rights fees to be paid to a women 's professional sports league .
The WNBA gets more viewers on national television broadcasts -LRB- 413,000 -RRB- than both Major League Soccer -LRB- 253,000 -RRB- and the NHL -LRB- 310,732 -RRB- .
For men , the official ball is 29.5 inches -LRB- 75 cm -RRB- in circumference -LRB- size 7 , or a `` 295 ball '' -RRB- and weighs 22 oz -LRB- 623.69 grams -RRB- .
In 3x3 , a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game , a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions -LRB- men 's , women 's , and mixed teams -RRB- .
The ball may not be kicked , nor be struck with the fist .
For the offense , a violation of these rules results in loss of possession ; for the defense , most leagues reset the shot clock and the offensive team is given possession of the ball out of bounds .
There is a second category of fouls called technical fouls , which may be charged for various rules violations including failure to properly record a player in the scorebook , or for unsportsmanlike conduct .
These infractions result in one or two free throws , which may be taken by any of the five players on the court at the time .
Repeated incidents can result in disqualification .
In FIBA , a foul resulting in ejection is called a disqualifying foul , while in leagues other than the NBA , such a foul is referred to as flagrant .
Dunk Hoops -LRB- a.k.a. Dunk Ball -RRB- is a variation of the game of basketball , played on basketball hoops with lowered -LRB- under basketball regulation 10 feet -RRB- rims .
It originated when the popularity of the slam dunk grew and was developed to create better chances for dunks with lowered rims and using altered goaltending rules .
A bicycle stays upright while moving forward by being steered so as to keep its center of mass over the wheels .
This steering is usually provided by the rider , but under certain conditions may be provided by the bicycle itself .
The handlebars turn the fork and the front wheel via the stem , which rotates within the headset .
Drop handlebars `` drop '' as they curve forward and down , offering the cyclist best braking power from a more aerodynamic `` crouched '' position , as well as more upright positions in which the hands grip the brake lever mounts , the forward curves , or the upper flat sections for increasingly upright postures .
Mountain bikes generally feature a ` straight handlebar ' or ` riser bar ' with varying degrees of sweep backwards and centimeters rise upwards , as well as wider widths which can provide better handling due to increased leverage against the wheel .
In the Netherlands all train stations offer free bicycle parking , or a more secure parking place for a small fee , with the larger stations also offering bicycle repair shops .
Cycling is so popular that the parking capacity may be exceeded , while in some places such as Delft the capacity is usually exceeded .
In Trondheim in Norway , the Trampe bicycle lift has been developed to encourage cyclists by giving assistance on a steep hill .
Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults -LRB- LADA -RRB- is a condition in which type 1 DM develops in adults .
Adults with LADA are frequently initially misdiagnosed as having type 2 DM , based on age rather than cause .
A positive result , in the absence of unequivocal high blood sugar , should be confirmed by a repeat of any of the above methods on a different day .
It is preferable to measure a fasting glucose level because of the ease of measurement and the considerable time commitment of formal glucose tolerance testing , which takes two hours to complete and offers no prognostic advantage over the fasting test .
According to the current definition , two fasting glucose measurements above 126 mg/dl -LRB- 7.0 mmol/l -RRB- is considered diagnostic for diabetes mellitus .
The World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- estimates that diabetes mellitus resulted in 1.5 million deaths in 2012 , making it the 8th leading cause of death .
However another 2.2 million deaths worldwide were attributable to high blood glucose and the increased risks of cardiovascular disease and other associated complications -LRB- e.g. kidney failure -RRB- , which often lead to premature death and are often listed as the underlying cause on death certificates rather than diabetes .
For example , in 2014 , the International Diabetes Federation -LRB- IDF -RRB- estimated that diabetes resulted in 4.9 million deaths worldwide , using modeling to estimate the total amount of deaths that could be directly or indirectly attributed to diabetes .
In 1968 , Dalí had bought a castle in Púbol for Gala ; and starting in 1971 she would retreat there alone for weeks at a time .
His fears of abandonment and estrangement from his longtime artistic muse contributed to depression and failing health .
Between 1941 and 1970 , Dalí created an ensemble of 39 pieces of jewelry ; many pieces are intricate , and some contain moving parts .
The most famous assemblage , The Royal Heart , is made of gold and is encrusted with 46 rubies , 42 diamonds , and four emeralds , created in such a way that the center `` beats '' much like a real heart .
Dalí himself commented that `` Without an audience , without the presence of spectators , these jewels would not fulfill the function for which they came into being .
The `` Dalí -- Joies '' -LRB- `` The Jewels of Dalí '' -RRB- collection can be seen at the Dalí Theater Museum in Figueres , Catalonia , Spain , where it is on permanent exhibition .
Although negative aspects of society were being thrown into the life of Dalí which affected the commercial success of his artwork , it did not hold him back from expressing his own ideas and beliefs in his art .
`` If Un Chien Andalou stands as the supreme record of Surrealism 's adventures into the realm of the unconscious , then L'Âge d'Or is perhaps the most trenchant and implacable expression of its revolutionary intent '' .
Architectural achievements include his Port Lligat house near Cadaqués , as well as his Theatre and Museum in Figueres .
A major work outside of Spain was the temporary Dream of Venus surrealist pavilion at the 1939 New York World 's Fair , which contained within it a number of unusual sculptures and statues , including live performers posing as statues .
In interviews Dali revealed his mysticism .
In his later years , while still remaining a Roman Catholic , Dalí also claimed to be an agnostic .
An internal combustion engine -LRB- ICE -RRB- is a heat engine where the combustion of a fuel occurs with an oxidizer -LRB- usually air -RRB- in a combustion chamber that is an integral part of the working fluid flow circuit .
In an internal combustion engine the expansion of the high-temperature and high-pressure gases produced by combustion applies direct force to some component of the engine .
The force is applied typically to pistons , turbine blades , rotor or a nozzle .
This force moves the component over a distance , transforming chemical energy into useful mechanical energy .
Power : While the piston is descending the combustion gases perform work on it -- as in a 4-stroke engine -- .
The same thermodynamic considerations about the expansion apply .
CI engines that use a blower typically use uniflow scavenging .
In this design the cylinder wall contains several intake ports placed uniformly spaced along the circumference just above the position that the piston crown reaches when at BDC .
The final part of the intake manifold is an air sleeve which feeds the intake ports .
The intake ports are placed at an horizontal angle to the cylinder wall -LRB- I.e : they are in plane of the piston crown -RRB- to give a swirl to the incoming charge to improve combustion .
The largest reciprocating IC are low speed CI engines of this type ; they are used for marine propulsion -LRB- see marine diesel engine -RRB- or electric power generation and achieve the highest thermal efficiencies among internal combustion engines of any kind .
Some Diesel-electric locomotive engines operate on the 2-stroke cycle .
The EMD SD90MAC class of locomotives use a 2-stroke engine .
The comparable class GE AC6000CW whose prime mover has almost the same brake power uses a 4-stroke engine .
Dugald Clerk developed the first two cycle engine in 1879 .
It used a separate cylinder which functioned as a pump in order to transfer the fuel mixture to the cylinder .
Because there is no obstruction in the cylinder of the fuel to move directly out of the exhaust port prior to the piston rising far enough to close the port , early engines used a high domed piston to slow down the flow of fuel .
Later the fuel was `` resonated '' back into the cylinder using an expansion chamber design .
When the piston rose close to TDC a spark ignites the fuel .
As the piston is driven downward with power it first uncovers the exhaust port where the burned fuel is expelled under high pressure and then the intake port where the process has been completed and will keep repeating .
Some systems disable alternator field -LRB- rotor -RRB- power during wide open throttle conditions .
Disabling the field reduces alternator pulley mechanical loading to nearly zero , maximizing crankshaft power .
In this case the battery supplies all primary electrical power .
Gasoline engines take in a mixture of air and gasoline and compress it by the movement of the piston from bottom dead center to top dead center when the fuel is at maximum compression .
The reduction in the size of the swept area of the cylinder and taking into account the volume of the combustion chamber is described by a ratio .
Where very high power-to-weight ratios are required , internal combustion engines appear in the form of combustion turbines or Wankel engines .
Powered aircraft typically uses an ICE which may be a reciprocating engine .
Airplanes can instead use jet engines and helicopters can instead employ turboshafts ; both of which are types of turbines .
In addition to providing propulsion , airliners may employ a separate ICE as an auxiliary power unit .
Wankel engines are fitted to many unmanned aerial vehicles .
Internal combustion engines are heat engines , and as such their theoretical efficiency can be approximated by idealized thermodynamic cycles .
The thermal efficiency of a theoretical cycle can not exceed that of the Carnot cycle , whose efficiency is determined by the difference between the lower and upper operating temperatures of the engine .
The upper operating temperature of an engine is limited by two main factors ; the thermal operating limits of the materials , and the auto-ignition resistance of the fuel .
All metals and alloys have a thermal operating limit , and there is significant research into ceramic materials that can be made with greater thermal stability and desirable structural properties .
Higher thermal stability allows for a greater temperature difference between the lower -LRB- ambient -RRB- and upper operating temperatures , hence greater thermodynamic efficiency .
Also , as the cylinder temperature rises , the engine becomes more prone to auto-ignition .
This is caused when the cylinder temperature nears the flash point of the charge .
At this point , ignition can spontaneously occur before the spark plug fires , causing excessive cylinder pressures .
Auto-ignition can be mitigated by using fuels with high auto-ignition resistance -LRB- octane rating -RRB- , however it still puts an upper bound on the allowable peak cylinder temperature .
Unlike in higher animals , where parthenogenesis is rare , asexual reproduction may occur in plants by several different mechanisms .
Particularly in arctic or alpine habitats , where opportunities for fertilisation of flowers by animals are rare , plantlets or bulbs , may develop instead of flowers , replacing sexual reproduction with asexual reproduction and giving rise to clonal populations genetically identical to the parent .
This is one of several types of apomixis that occur in plants .
Apomixis can also happen in a seed , producing a seed that contains an embryo genetically identical to the parent .
Chloroplasts are inherited through the male parent in gymnosperms but often through the female parent in flowering plants .
Model plants such as Arabidopsis thaliana are used for studying the molecular biology of plant cells and the chloroplast .
Ideally , these organisms have small genomes that are well known or completely sequenced , small stature and short generation times .
Corn has been used to study mechanisms of photosynthesis and phloem loading of sugar in C4 plants .
The single celled green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii , while not an embryophyte itself , contains a green-pigmented chloroplast related to that of land plants , making it useful for study .
A red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae has also been used to study some basic chloroplast functions .
Spinach , peas , soybeans and a moss Physcomitrella patens are commonly used to study plant cell biology .
Stems mainly provide support to the leaves and reproductive structures , but can store water in succulent plants such as cacti , food as in potato tubers , or reproduce vegetatively as in the stolons of strawberry plants or in the process of layering .
Leaves gather sunlight and carry out photosynthesis .
Large , flat , flexible , green leaves are called foliage leaves .
Angiosperms are seed-producing plants that produce flowers and have enclosed seeds .
Woody plants , such as azaleas and oaks , undergo a secondary growth phase resulting in two additional types of tissues : wood -LRB- secondary xylem -RRB- and bark -LRB- secondary phloem and cork -RRB- .
Some plants reproduce sexually , some asexually , and some via both means .
Systematic botany is part of systematic biology , which is concerned with the range and diversity of organisms and their relationships , particularly as determined by their evolutionary history .
Modern taxonomy is rooted in the work of Carl Linnaeus , who grouped species according to shared physical characteristics .
These groupings have since been revised to align better with the Darwinian principle of common descent -- grouping organisms by ancestry rather than superficial characteristics .
While scientists do not always agree on how to classify organisms , molecular phylogenetics , which uses DNA sequences as data , has driven many recent revisions along evolutionary lines and is likely to continue to do so .
The dominant classification system is called Linnaean taxonomy .
The nomenclature of botanical organisms is codified in the International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants -LRB- ICN -RRB- and administered by the International Botanical Congress .
In France , Hugo is known primarily for his poetry collections , such as Les Contemplations -LRB- The Contemplations -RRB- and La Légende des siècles -LRB- The Legend of the Ages -RRB- .
According to religious records , he was assigned by God to lead the foreign mission as part of God 's Divine hierarchy .
Mount Everest , also known in Nepal as Sagarmāthā and in China as Chomolungma / 珠穆朗玛峰 , is Earth 's highest mountain .
The international border between China -LRB- Tibet Autonomous Region -RRB- and Nepal runs across Everest 's summit point .
Its massif includes neighbouring peaks Lhotse , 8,516 m -LRB- 27,940 ft -RRB- ; Nuptse , 7,855 m -LRB- 25,771 ft -RRB- , and Changtse , 7,580 m -LRB- 24,870 ft -RRB- .
Climbers spend a couple of weeks in Base Camp , acclimatising to the altitude .
During that time , Sherpas and some expedition climbers set up ropes and ladders in the treacherous Khumbu Icefall .
Seracs , crevasses and shifting blocks of ice make the icefall one of the most dangerous sections of the route .
Many climbers and Sherpas have been killed in this section .
To reduce the hazard , climbers usually begin their ascent well before dawn , when the freezing temperatures glue ice blocks in place .
Below the summit there is an area known as `` rainbow valley '' , filled with dead bodies still wearing brightly coloured winter gear .
Down to about 8000 metres is an area commonly called the `` death zone '' , due to the high danger and low oxygen because of the low pressure .
The team made a huge effort for the next 12 hours to try to get him down the mountain , but to no avail , as they were unsuccessful in getting him through the difficult sections .
Even for the able , the Everest North-East ridge is recognised as a challenge .
It is hard to rescue someone who has become incapacitated and it can be beyond the ability of rescuers to save anyone in such a difficult spot .
One way around this situation was pioneered by two Nepali men in 2013 , who had intended to paraglide off the summit .
It was first used on the 1922 British Mount Everest Expedition by George Finch and Geoffrey Bruce who climbed up to 7,800 m -LRB- 25,600 ft -RRB- at a spectacular speed of 1,000 vertical feet per hour -LRB- vf/h -RRB- .
Pinned down by a fierce storm , they escaped death by breathing oxygen from a jury-rigged set-up during the night .
Yet the use of oxygen was considered so unsportsmanlike that none of the rest of the Alpine world recognised this high ascent rate .
George Mallory himself described the use of such oxygen as unsportsmanlike , but he later concluded that it would be impossible for him to summit without it and consequently used it on his final attempt in 1924 .
When Tenzing and Hillary made the first successful summit in 1953 , they used bottled oxygen , with the expedition 's physiologist Griffith Pugh referring to the oxygen debate as a `` futile controversy '' , noting that oxygen `` greatly increases subjective appreciation of the surroundings , which after all is one of the chief reasons for climbing . ''
For the next twenty-five years , bottled oxygen was considered standard for any successful summit .
The low oxygen can cause a mental fog-like impairment of cognitive abilities described as `` delayed and lethargic thought process , clinically defined as bradypsychia '' even after returning to lower altitudes .
In severe cases , climbers can experience hallucinations .
Some studies have found that high-altitude climbers , including Everest climbers , experience altered brain structure .
The effects of high altitude on the brain , particularly if it can cause permanent brain damage , continue to be studied .
In 2014 one team used a helicopter to fly from South base camp to Camp 2 to avoid the Khumbu Icefall , then reached the Everest summit .
This team had to use the south side because the Chinese had denied them a permit to climb .
Ultimately , Chinese reluctance may have been beneficial to Nepalese interests , allowing the government to showcase improved local hospitals and the opportunity for a new hybrid aviation/mountaneering style -- which sparked conversations about helicopter use in the mountaineering world .
Nepal ended up investigating Wang , and she denied the charge but admitted she did fly some support crew over the Khumbu Icefall to Camp 2 using a helicopter .
National Geographic noted how a village festooned Wang with honours after she donated 30,000 USD to the town 's hospital .
Wang won International Mountaineer of the Year Award from the Nepal government in June 2014 .
Jamling Tenzing Norgay , the son of Tenzing Norgay , said in a 2003 interview that his late father would have been shocked to discover that rich thrill-seekers with no climbing experience were now routinely reaching the summit , `` You still have to climb this mountain yourself with your feet .
There are people going up there who have no idea how to put on crampons .
They are climbing because they have paid someone $ 65,000 .
`` Several members were bullied , gear was stolen , and threats were made against me and my climbing partner , Michael Kodas , making an already stressful situation even more dire . ''
The Chinese side of the Everest in Tibet was called `` out of control '' after one Canadian had all his gear stolen and was abandoned by his Sherpa .
Another sherpa helped him get off the mountain safely and gave him some spare gear .
Other climbers have also noted missing oxygen bottles , which can be worth hundreds of dollars each .
One of the problems is that there are hundreds of climbers passing by people 's tents , although the weather can also damage or even blow people 's equipment away .
Near the base of the north side of Everest lies Rongbuk Monastery , which has been called the `` sacred threshold to Mount Everest , with the most dramatic views of the world . ''
For Sherpas living on the slopes of Everest in the Khumbu region of Nepal , Rongbuk Monastery is an important pilgrimage site , accessed in a few days of travel across the Himalayas through Nangpa La. .
The Qomolangma Formation , also known as the Jolmo Lungama Formation or the Everest Formation , runs from the summit to the top of the Yellow Band , about 8,600 m -LRB- 28,200 ft -RRB- above sea level .
It consists of greyish to dark grey or white , parallel laminated and bedded , Ordovician limestone inter layered with subordinate beds of recrystallised dolomite with argillaceous laminae and siltstone .
Gansser first reported finding microscopic fragments of crinoids in this limestone .
Later petrographic analysis of samples of the limestone from near the summit revealed them to be composed of carbonate pellets and finely fragmented remains of trilobites , crinoids , and ostracods .
Other samples were so badly sheared and recrystallised that their original constituents could not be determined .
This bed , which crops out starting about 70 m -LRB- 230 ft -RRB- below the summit of Mount Everest , consists of sediments trapped , bound , and cemented by the biofilms of micro-organisms , especially cyanobacteria , in shallow marine waters .
The Qomolangma Formation is broken up by several high-angle faults that terminate at the low angle normal fault , the Qomolangma Detachment .
This detachment separates it from the underlying Yellow Band .
The lower five metres of the Qomolangma Formation overlying this detachment are very highly deformed .
The remainder of the North Col Formation , exposed between 7,000 to 8,200 m -LRB- 23,000 to 26,900 ft -RRB- on Mount Everest , consists of interlayered and deformed schist , phyllite , and minor marble .
Between 7,600 and 8,200 m -LRB- 24,900 and 26,900 ft -RRB- , the North Col Formation consists chiefly of biotite-quartz phyllite and chlorite-biotite phyllite intercalated with minor amounts of biotite-sericite-quartz schist .
Between 7,000 and 7,600 m -LRB- 23,000 and 24,900 ft -RRB- , the lower part of the North Col Formation consists of biotite-quartz schist intercalated with epidote-quartz schist , biotite-calcite-quartz schist , and thin layers of quartzose marble .
These metamorphic rocks appear to be the result of the metamorphism of Middle to Early Cambrian deep sea flysch composed of interbedded , mudstone , shale , clayey sandstone , calcareous sandstone , graywacke , and sandy limestone .
The base of the North Col Formation is a regional low-angle normal fault called the `` Lhotse detachment '' .
In the summer , the Indian monsoon brings warm wet air from the Indian Ocean to Everest 's south side .
During the winter the west-southwest flowing jet stream shifts south and blows on the peak .
The northern approach to the mountain was discovered by George Mallory and Guy Bullock on the initial 1921 British Reconnaissance Expedition .
It was an exploratory expedition not equipped for a serious attempt to climb the mountain .
With Mallory leading -LRB- and thus becoming the first European to set foot on Everest 's flanks -RRB- they climbed the North Col to an altitude of 7,005 metres -LRB- 22,982 ft -RRB- .
From there , Mallory espied a route to the top , but the party was unprepared for the great task of climbing any further and descended .
Groundbreaking expedition in the history of world mountaineering - during this expedition captured the first eight-thousander in the winter , which opened a new front activities - winter expeditions in the highest mountains in the world .
On 11 May 1996 eight climbers died after several expeditions were caught in a blizzard high up on the mountain .
During the 1996 season , 15 people died while climbing on Mount Everest .
The liver is the second largest organ -LRB- after the skin -RRB- and is an accessory digestive gland which plays a role in the body 's metabolism .
The liver is located in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen and below the diaphragm to which it is attached at one part , This is to the right of the stomach and it overlies the gall bladder .
The liver produces bile , an important alkaline compound which aids digestion .
The liver can detoxify various metabolites ; synthesise proteins and produce biochemicals needed for digestion .
The liver can also synthesise glucose from certain amino acids .
Fats are also produced in the process of lipogenesis .
The liver synthesises the bulk of lipoproteins .
The chylomicrons are small enough to pass through the enterocyte villi and into their lymph capillaries called lacteals .
A milky fluid called chyle , consisting mainly of the emulsified fats of the chylomicrons , results from the absorbed mix with the lymph in the lacteals .
Chyle is then transported through the lymphatic system to the rest of the body .
The celiac artery supplies the liver , stomach , spleen and the upper 1/3 of the duodenum -LRB- to the sphincter of Oddi -RRB- and the pancreas with oxygenated blood .
Most of the blood is returned to the liver via the portal venous system for further processing and detoxification before returning to the systemic circulation via the hepatic portal vein .
Mouth diseases can also be caused by pathogenic bacteria , viruses and fungi .
Mouth diseases include tongue diseases and salivary gland diseases .
A common gum disease in the mouth is gingivitis which is caused by bacteria in plaque .
The most common viral infection of the mouth is gingivostomatitis caused by herpes simplex .
A common fungal infection is candidiasis commonly known as thrush which affects the mucous membranes of the mouth .
There are a number of esophageal diseases such as the development of Schatzki rings that can restrict the passageway , causing difficulties in swallowing .
A number of problems including malnutrition and anemia can arise from malabsorption , the abnormal absorption of nutrients in the GI tract .
This can cause vitamin deficiencies due to the improper absorption of nutrients in the small intestine .
The small intestine can also be obstructed by a volvulus , a loop of intestine that becomes twisted enclosing its attached mesentery .
This can cause mesenteric ischemia if severe enough .
These include the various cells of the gastric glands , taste cells , pancreatic duct cells , enterocytes and microfold cells .
Endoplasmic reticulum : The endoplasmic reticulum -LRB- ER -RRB- is a transport network for molecules targeted for certain modifications and specific destinations , as compared to molecules that float freely in the cytoplasm .
The ER has two forms : the rough ER , which has ribosomes on its surface that secrete proteins into the ER , and the smooth ER , which lacks ribosomes .
The cell wall acts to protect the cell mechanically and chemically from its environment , and is an additional layer of protection to the cell membrane .
Different types of cell have cell walls made up of different materials ; plant cell walls are primarily made up of cellulose , fungi cell walls are made up of chitin and bacteria cell walls are made up of peptidoglycan .
The bacterial flagellum stretches from cytoplasm through the cell membrane -LRB- s -RRB- and extrudes through the cell wall .
A different type of flagellum is found in archaea and a different type is found in eukaryotes .
Multicellularity has evolved independently at least 25 times , including in some prokaryotes , like cyanobacteria , myxobacteria , actinomycetes , Magnetoglobus multicellularis or Methanosarcina .
However , complex multicellular organisms evolved only in six eukaryotic groups : animals , fungi , brown algae , red algae , green algae , and plants .
Multicellularity may have evolved from colonies of interdependent organisms , from cellularization , or from organisms in symbiotic relationships .
Rembrandt 's own studio practice is a major factor in the difficulty of attribution , since , like many masters before him , he encouraged his students to copy his paintings , sometimes finishing or retouching them to be sold as originals , and sometimes selling them as authorized copies .
Additionally , his style proved easy enough for his most talented students to emulate .
As well , there were later imitations of his work , and restorations which so seriously damaged the original works that they are no longer recognizable .
Two serious medical conditions particularly affecting dogs are pyometra , affecting unspayed females of all types and ages , and gastric dilatation volvulus -LRB- bloat -RRB- , which affects the larger breeds or deep-chested dogs .
About 22 % of boxer puppies die before reaching 7 weeks of age .
Stillbirth is the most frequent cause of death , followed by infection .
Mortality due to infection was found to increase significantly with increases in inbreeding .
Emigrants from Siberia that walked across the Bering land bridge into North America may have had dogs in their company , and one writer suggests that the use of sled dogs may have been critical to the success of the waves that entered North America roughly 12,000 years ago , although the earliest archaeological evidence of dog-like canids in North America dates from about 9,400 years ago .
Dogs also carried much of the load in the migration of the Apache and Navajo tribes 1,400 years ago .
Use of dogs as pack animals in these cultures often persisted after the introduction of the horse to North America .
According to statistics published by the American Pet Products Manufacturers Association in the National Pet Owner Survey in 2009 -- 2010 , it is estimated there are 77.5 million people with pet dogs in the United States .
The same survey shows nearly 40 % of American households own at least one dog , of which 67 % own just one dog , 25 % two dogs and nearly 9 % more than two dogs .
There does not seem to be any gender preference among dogs as pets , as the statistical data reveal an equal number of female and male dog pets .
Yet , although several programs are ongoing to promote pet adoption , less than a fifth of the owned dogs come from a shelter .
Medical detection dogs are capable of detecting diseases by sniffing a person directly or samples of urine or other specimens .
Dogs can detect odour in one part per trillion , as their brain 's olfactory cortex is -LRB- relative to total brain size -RRB- 40 times larger than humans .
Each dog is trained specifically for the detection of single disease from the blood glucose level indicative to diabetes to cancer .
The process of training a cancer dog requires six months .
A Labrador Retriever called Daisy has detected 551 cancer patients with an accuracy of 93 percent and received the Blue Cross -LRB- for pets -RRB- Medal for her life-saving skills .
In Greek mythology , Cerberus is a three-headed watchdog who guards the gates of Hades .
In Norse mythology , a bloody , four-eyed dog called Garmr guards Helheim .
In Persian mythology , two four-eyed dogs guard the Chinvat Bridge .
In Welsh mythology , Annwn is guarded by Cŵn Annwn .
Like other churches throughout Christendom , the basilica offered sanctuary from persecution to outlaws .
The Comnenus mosaic , also located on the eastern wall of the southern gallery , dates from 1122 .
The Virgin Mary is standing in the middle , depicted , as usual in Byzantine art , in a dark blue gown .
The empress is shown with plaited blond hair , rosy cheeks and grey eyes , revealing her Hungarian descent .
The emperor is depicted in a dignified manner .
On her right side stands emperor John II Comnenus , represented in a garb embellished with precious stones .
Empress Irene stands on the left side of the Virgin , wearing ceremonial garments and offering a document .
Their eldest son Alexius Comnenus is represented on an adjacent pilaster .
He is shown as a beardless youth , probably representing his appearance at his coronation aged seventeen .
In this panel one can already see a difference with the Empress Zoe mosaic that is one century older .
The Patriarch of Constantinople John Chrysostom came into a conflict with Empress Aelia Eudoxia , wife of the emperor Arcadius , and was sent into exile on 20 June 404 .
During the subsequent riots , this first church was largely burned down .
The Jacoby rule , named after Oswald Jacoby , allows gammons and backgammons to count for their respective double and triple values only if the cube has already been offered and accepted .
This encourages a player with a large lead to double , possibly ending the game , rather than to play it to conclusion hoping for a gammon or backgammon .
The Jacoby rule is widely used in money play but is not used in match play .
These games are played one after another , in matches of three , five , or seven points .
Before starting a match , each player rolls 1 die , and the player with the highest roll picks up both dice and re-rolls -LRB- i.e. it is possible to roll doubles for the opening move -RRB- .
Players use the same pair of dice in turns .
After the first game , the winner of the previous game starts first .
Each game counts as 1 point , if the opponent has borne off at least 1 stone , otherwise 2 points -LRB- gammon/backgammon -RRB- .
It was first introduced in the 1920s in New York City among members of gaming clubs in the Lower East Side .
The cube required players not only to select the best move in a given position , but also to estimate the probability of winning from that position , transforming backgammon into the expected value-driven game played in the 20th and 21st centuries .
Checkers placed on the bar must re-enter the game through the opponent 's home board before any other move can be made .
A roll of 1 allows the checker to enter on the 24-point -LRB- opponent 's 1 -RRB- , a roll of 2 on the 23-point -LRB- opponent 's 2 -RRB- , and so forth , up to a roll of 6 allowing entry on the 19-point -LRB- opponent 's 6 -RRB- .
Checkers may not enter on a point occupied by two or more opposing checkers .
Checkers can enter on unoccupied points , or on points occupied by a single opposing checker ; in the latter case , the single checker is hit and placed on the bar .
A player may not move any other checkers until all checkers on the bar belonging to that player have re-entered the board .
If a player has checkers on the bar , but rolls a combination that does not allow any of those checkers to re-enter , the player does not move .
If the opponent 's home board is completely `` closed '' -LRB- i.e. all six points are each occupied by two or more checkers -RRB- , there is no roll that will allow a player to enter a checker from the bar , and that player stops rolling and playing until at least one point becomes open -LRB- occupied by one or zero checkers -RRB- due to the opponent 's moves .
Two instances are documented in letters he wrote to the publishers and blockcutters involved in the production of his designs in Toshisen Ehon , a Japanese edition of an anthology of Chinese poetry .
Hokusai writes to the book 's publisher that the blockcutter Egawa Tomekichi , with whom Hokusai had previously worked and whom he respected , had strayed from Hokusai 's style in the cutting of certain heads .
Hokusai also wrote directly to another blockcutter involved in the project , Sugita Kinsuke , stating that he disliked the Utagawa-school style in which Kinsuke had cut the figure 's eyes and noses and that amendments would need to be made for the final prints to be true to Hokusai 's style .
In his letter Hokusai includes illustrated examples of both his style of illustrating eyes and noses , and the Utagawa -- school style .
The publisher agreed to make these alterations , even with hundreds of copies of the book already printed .
To correct these details the already existing cut blocks would be corrected by use of the umeki technique .
The sections to be corrected would be removed and a prepared piece of wood inserted , into which the blockcutter would cut the revised design .
Use of the umeki technique can be detected by fine break marks bordering the inserted block .
Copies in print of both the original woodblock and those made of Hokusai 's requested revisions survive , printed in 1833 and 1836 respectively .
At the age of 12 , his father sent him to work in a bookshop and lending library , a popular type of institution in Japanese cities , where reading books made from wood-cut blocks was a popular entertainment of the middle and upper classes .
At 14 , he worked as an apprentice to a wood-carver , until the age of 18 , when he entered the studio of Katsukawa Shunshō .
Ukiyo-e , as practiced by artists like Shunshō , focused on images of the courtesans and Kabuki actors who were popular in Japan 's cities at the time .
After a year , Hokusai 's name changed for the first time , when he was dubbed Shunrō by his master .
It was under this name that he published his first prints , a series of pictures of Kabuki actors published in 1779 .
During the decade he worked in Shunshō 's studio , Hokusai was married to his first wife , about whom very little is known except that she died in the early 1790s .
He married again in 1797 , although this second wife also died after a short time .
He fathered two sons and three daughters with these two wives , and his youngest daughter Sakae , also known as Ōi , eventually became an artist .
The Tang dynasty -LRB- Chinese : 唐朝 -RRB- was an imperial dynasty of China preceded by the Sui dynasty and followed by the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period .
Its territory , acquired through the military campaigns of its early rulers , rivaled that of the Han dynasty , and the Tang capital at Chang ` an -LRB- present-day Xi'an -RRB- was the most populous city in the world .
There were many prominent women at court during and after Wu 's reign , including Shangguan Wan ` er -LRB- 664 -- 710 -RRB- , a poet , writer , and trusted official in charge of Wu 's private office .
In 706 the wife of Emperor Zhongzong of Tang , Empress Wei -LRB- d. 710 -RRB- , persuaded her husband to staff government offices with his sister and her daughters , and in 709 requested that he grant women the right to bequeath hereditary privileges to their sons -LRB- which before was a male right only -RRB- .
Empress Wei eventually poisoned Zhongzong , whereupon she placed his fifteen-year-old son upon the throne in 710 .
Two weeks later , Li Longji -LRB- the later Emperor Xuanzong -RRB- entered the palace with a few followers and slew Empress Wei and her faction .
Just as Emperor Zhongzong was dominated by Empress Wei , so too was Ruizong dominated by Princess Taiping .
This was finally ended when Princess Taiping 's coup failed in 712 -LRB- she later hanged herself in 713 -RRB- and Emperor Ruizong abdicated to Emperor Xuanzong .
Civil war in China was almost totally diminished by 626 , along with the defeat in 628 of the Ordos Chinese warlord Liang Shidu ; after these internal conflicts , the Tang began an offensive against the Turks .
In the year 630 , Tang armies captured areas of the Ordos Desert , modern-day Inner Mongolia province , and southern Mongolia from the Turks .
After this military victory , Emperor Taizong won the title of Great Khan amongst the various Turks in the region who pledged their allegiance to him and the Chinese empire -LRB- with several thousand Turks traveling into China to live at Chang ` an -RRB- .
On June 11 , 631 , Emperor Taizong also sent envoys to the Xueyantuo bearing gold and silk in order to persuade the release of enslaved Chinese prisoners who were captured during the transition from Sui to Tang from the northern frontier ; this embassy succeeded in freeing 80,000 Chinese men and women who were then returned to China .
Chinese geographers such as Jia Dan wrote accurate descriptions of places far abroad .
In his work written between 785 and 805 , he described the sea route going into the mouth of the Persian Gulf , and that the medieval Iranians -LRB- whom he called the people of Luo-He-Yi -RRB- had erected ` ornamental pillars ' in the sea that acted as lighthouse beacons for ships that might go astray .
Confirming Jia 's reports about lighthouses in the Persian Gulf , Arabic writers a century after Jia wrote of the same structures , writers such as al-Mas ` udi and al-Muqaddasi .
The Tang dynasty Chinese diplomat Wang Xuance traveled to Magadha -LRB- modern northeastern India -RRB- during the 7th century .
Afterwards he wrote the book Zhang Tianzhu Guotu -LRB- Illustrated Accounts of Central India -RRB- , which included a wealth of geographical information .
During the Tang , the many common foodstuffs and cooking ingredients in addition to those already listed were barley , garlic , salt , turnips , soybeans , pears , apricots , peaches , apples , pomegranates , jujubes , rhubarb , hazelnuts , pine nuts , chestnuts , walnuts , yams , taro , etc. .
The various meats that were consumed included pork , chicken , lamb -LRB- especially preferred in the north -RRB- , sea otter , bear -LRB- which was hard to catch , but there were recipes for steamed , boiled , and marinated bear -RRB- , and even Bactrian camels .
In the south along the coast meat from seafood was by default the most common , as the Chinese enjoyed eating cooked jellyfish with cinnamon , Sichuan pepper , cardamom , and ginger , as well as oysters with wine , fried squid with ginger and vinegar , horseshoe crabs and red swimming crabs , shrimp and pufferfish , which the Chinese called `` river piglet '' .
Woodblock printing made the written word available to vastly greater audiences .
One of the world 's oldest surviving printed documents is a miniature Buddhist dharani sutra unearthed at Xi'an in 1974 and dated roughly from 650 to 670 .
The Diamond Sutra is the first full-length book printed at regular size , complete with illustrations embedded with the text and dated precisely to 868 .
Among the earliest documents to be printed were Buddhist texts as well as calendars , the latter essential for calculating and marking which days were auspicious and which days were not .
With so many books coming into circulation for the general public , literacy rates could improve , along with the lower classes being able to obtain cheaper sources of study .
Therefore , there were more lower-class people seen entering the Imperial Examinations and passing them by the later Song dynasty .
Although the later Bi Sheng 's movable type printing in the 11th century was innovative for his period , woodblock printing that became widespread in the Tang would remain the dominant printing type in China until the more advanced printing press from Europe became widely accepted and used in East Asia .
In 683 , Emperor Gaozong died .
He was succeeded by Emperor Zhongzong , his eldest surviving son by Wu .
To legitimize her rule , she circulated a document known as the Great Cloud Sutra , which predicted that a reincarnation of the Maitreya Buddha would be a female monarch who would dispel illness , worry , and disaster from the world .
She even introduced numerous revised written characters to the written language , which reverted to the originals after her death .
Arguably the most important part of her legacy was diminishing the power of the northwest aristocracy , allowing people from other clans and regions of China to become more represented in Chinese politics and government .
Zhongzong tried to appoint his wife 's father as chancellor : after only six weeks on the throne , he was deposed by Empress Wu in favor of his younger brother , 12-year-old Emperor Ruizong .
This provoked a group of Tang princes to rebel in 684 ; Wu 's armies suppressed them within two months .
She proclaimed the Tianshou era of Wu Zhou on October 16 , 690 , and three days later demoted Emperor Ruizong to crown prince .
The next day , her son Zhongzong was restored to power ; the Tang was formally restored on March 3 .
The French , led by Charles , similarly sought to expand their influence seizing Sicily and Byzantine territory while also marrying his daughters to the Latin claimants to Byzantium .
Charles executed one rival to the throne of Jerusalem and purchased the rights to Jerusalem from another to create his own claim to the throne .
Martin excommunicated Peter and called for an Aragonese Crusade in unsuccessful response .
Charles died in 1285 having spent his life trying to amass a Mediterranean empire , and he and Louis saw themselves as God 's instruments to uphold the papacy .
In 1270 , Charles turned his brother King Louis IX 's last Crusade , notionally known as the Eighth Crusade , to his own advantage by persuading Louis to attack his rebel Arab vassals in Tunis .
Louis ' army was devastated by disease i and Louis himself died at Tunis on 25 August .
Louis ' fleet returned to France leveing only Prince Edward and a small retinue to continue with what is known as the Ninth Crusade .
Edward survived an assassination attempt organised by Beibars , negotiated a ten-year truce and then returned to manage his affairs in England .
This ended the last significant Crusading effort in the Eastern Mediterranean .
The 1281 election of a French pope , Martin IV , brought the full power of the papacy into line behind Charles .
But , in what became known as the Sicilian Vespers , an uprising fomented by Michael VIII Palailogos deprived him of the resources of Sicily and Peter III of Aragon was proclaimed king of Sicily .
The Crusades in the Holy Land are traditionally counted as nine distinct campaigns , numbered from the First Crusade of 1095 -- 99 to the Ninth Crusade of 1271/2 .
This convention is used by Charles Mills in his History of the Crusades for the Recovery and Possession of the Holy Land -LRB- 1820 -RRB- , and is often retained for convenience , even though it is somewhat arbitrary : The Fifth and Sixth Crusades led by Frederick II may be considered a single campaign , as can the Eighth Crusade and Ninth Crusade led by Louis IX .
Beauty is a characteristic of an animal , idea , object , person or place that provides a perceptual experience of pleasure or satisfaction .
Beauty is studied as part of aesthetics , culture , social psychology and sociology .
In the aftermath of postmodernism 's rejection of beauty , thinkers have returned to beauty as an important value .
American analytic philosopher Guy Sircello proposed his New Theory of Beauty as an effort to reaffirm the status of beauty as an important philosophical concept .
Elaine Scarry also argues that beauty is related to justice .
Peter attempted to acquire control of the Black Sea ; to do so he would have to expel the Tatars from the surrounding areas .
As part of an agreement with Poland which ceded Kiev to Russia , Peter was forced to wage war against the Crimean Khan and against the Khan 's overlord , the Ottoman Sultan .
Peter 's primary objective became the capture of the Ottoman fortress of Azov , near the Don River .
In the summer of 1695 Peter organized the Azov campaigns to take the fortress , but his attempts ended in failure .
He commanded all of his courtiers and officials to wear European clothing and cut off their long beards , causing his Boyars , who were very fond of their beards , great upset .
Boyars who sought to retain their beards were required to pay an annual beard tax of one hundred rubles .
In 1716 and 1717 , the Tsar revisited the Netherlands , and went to see Herman Boerhaave .
The Tsar 's navy was so powerful that the Russians could penetrate Sweden .
Peter also obtained the assistance of the Electorate of Hanover and the Kingdom of Prussia .
Peter 's last years were marked by further reform in Russia .
On 22 October 1721 , soon after peace was made with Sweden , he was officially proclaimed Emperor of All Russia .
Some proposed that he take the title Emperor of the East , but he refused .
Gavrila Golovkin , the State Chancellor , was the first to add `` the Great , Father of His Country , Emperor of All the Russias '' to Peter 's traditional title Tsar following a speech by the archbishop of Pskov in 1721 .
In 1700 , when the office fell vacant , Peter refused to name a replacement , allowing the Patriarch 's Coadjutor -LRB- or deputy -RRB- to discharge the duties of the office .
These included three sons named Pavel and three sons named Peter , all of whom died in infancy .
Peter was not particularly concerned that others ruled in his name .
Peter 's mother sought to force him to adopt a more conventional approach , and arranged his marriage to Eudoxia Lopukhina in 1689 .
The marriage was a failure , and ten years later Peter forced his wife to become a nun and thus freed himself from the union .
From this point , the tribes were no longer cannibals , but possessed firearms , apparently as a result of Portuguese influence .
Most probably -LRB- Stanley 's own publications give inconsistent figures -RRB- , he lost 132 people through disease , hunger , drowning , killing and desertion .
On 15 March they started the descent of the falls , which took five months and cost numerous lives .
From there Stanley sent four men with letters forward to Boma , asking for food for his starving people .
On August 7 relief came , being sent by representatives from the Liverpool trading firm Hatton & Cookson .
The party then consisted of 108 people , including three children born during the trip .
In the fabulous ages of ancient times the appellations of Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter and Saturn were given to the Planets , as being the names of their principal heroes and divinities .
In the present more philosophical era it would hardly be allowable to have recourse to the same method and call it Juno , Pallas , Apollo or Minerva , for a name to our new heavenly body .
The Uranian axis of rotation is approximately parallel with the plane of the Solar System , with an axial tilt of 97.77 ° -LRB- as defined by prograde rotation -RRB- .
This gives it seasonal changes completely unlike those of the other planets .
Near the solstice , one pole faces the Sun continuously and the other faces away .
Only a narrow strip around the equator experiences a rapid day -- night cycle , but with the Sun low over the horizon .
At the other side of Uranus 's orbit the orientation of the poles towards the Sun is reversed .
Each pole gets around 42 years of continuous sunlight , followed by 42 years of darkness .
Near the time of the equinoxes , the Sun faces the equator of Uranus giving a period of day -- night cycles similar to those seen on most of the other planets .
In contrast to the other planets , whose motions around the Sun resemble that of spinning tops , Uranus 's motion can be visualised as that of a ball rolling on the ecliptic plane near solstices and of a spinning rifle bullet near equinoxes .
Uranus is the only planet whose name is derived from a figure from Greek mythology , from the Latinised version of the Greek god of the sky Ouranos .
Its north and south poles , therefore , lie where most other planets have their equators .
In 1986 , images from Voyager 2 showed Uranus as an almost featureless planet in visible light , without the cloud bands or storms associated with the other giant planets .
Observations from Earth have shown seasonal change and increased weather activity as Uranus approached its equinox in 2007 .
Wind speeds can reach 250 metres per second -LRB- 900 km/h ; 560 mph -RRB- .
For a short period from March to May 2004 , large clouds appeared in the Uranian atmosphere , giving it a Neptune-like appearance .
Observations included record-breaking wind speeds of 820 km/h -LRB- 510 mph -RRB- and a persistent thunderstorm referred to as `` Fourth of July fireworks '' .
On August 23 , 2006 , researchers at the Space Science Institute -LRB- Boulder , Colorado -RRB- and the University of Wisconsin observed a dark spot on Uranus 's surface , giving scientists more insight into Uranus 's atmospheric activity .
Why this sudden upsurge in activity occurred is not fully known , but it appears that Uranus 's extreme axial tilt results in extreme seasonal variations in its weather .
Determining the nature of this seasonal variation is difficult because good data on Uranus 's atmosphere have existed for less than 84 years , or one full Uranian year .
Photometry over the course of half a Uranian year -LRB- beginning in the 1950s -RRB- has shown regular variation in the brightness in two spectral bands , with maxima occurring at the solstices and minima occurring at the equinoxes .
A similar periodic variation , with maxima at the solstices , has been noted in microwave measurements of the deep troposphere begun in the 1960s .
Stratospheric temperature measurements beginning in the 1970s also showed maximum values near the 1986 solstice .
The majority of this variability is thought to occur owing to changes in the viewing geometry .
There are some indications that physical seasonal changes are happening in Uranus .
Although Uranus is known to have a bright south polar region , the north pole is fairly dim , which is incompatible with the model of the seasonal change outlined above .
During its previous northern solstice in 1944 , Uranus displayed elevated levels of brightness , which suggests that the north pole was not always so dim .
This information implies that the visible pole brightens some time before the solstice and darkens after the equinox .
Detailed analysis of the visible and microwave data revealed that the periodical changes of brightness are not completely symmetrical around the solstices , which also indicates a change in the meridional albedo patterns .
In the 1990s , as Uranus moved away from its solstice , Hubble and ground-based telescopes revealed that the south polar cap darkened noticeably -LRB- except the southern collar , which remained bright -RRB- , whereas the northern hemisphere demonstrated increasing activity , such as cloud formations and stronger winds , bolstering expectations that it should brighten soon .
This indeed happened in 2007 when it passed an equinox : a faint northern polar collar arose , and the southern collar became nearly invisible , although the zonal wind profile remained slightly asymmetric , with northern winds being somewhat slower than southern .
Herschel recorded in his journal : `` In the quartile near ζ Tauri ... either -LSB- a -RSB- Nebulous star or perhaps a comet . ''
On March 17 he noted : `` I looked for the Comet or Nebulous Star and found that it is a Comet , for it has changed its place . ''
From experience I know that the diameters of the fixed stars are not proportionally magnified with higher powers , as planets are ; therefore I now put the powers at 460 and 932 , and found that the diameter of the comet increased in proportion to the power , as it ought to be , on the supposition of its not being a fixed star , while the diameters of the stars to which I compared it were not increased in the same ratio .
Moreover , the comet being magnified much beyond what its light would admit of , appeared hazy and ill-defined with these great powers , while the stars preserved that lustre and distinctness which from many thousand observations I knew they would retain .
The sequel has shown that my surmises were well-founded , this proving to be the Comet we have lately observed .
Around 1230 , Koreans invented a metal type movable printing using bronze .
The Jikji , published in 1377 , is the earliest known metal printed book .
Type-casting was used , adapted from the method of casting coins .
The character was cut in beech wood , which was then pressed into a soft clay to form a mould , and bronze poured into the mould , and finally the type was polished .
Cast metal movable type was spread to Europe between the late 14th century and the early 15th century .
Used today for printing labels such as airline baggage tags and individual price labels in supermarket deli counters .
Printed electronics is the manufacturing of electronic devices using standard printing processes .
Printed electronics technology can be produced on cheap materials such as paper or flexible film , which makes it an extremely cost-effective method of production .
Since early 2010 , the printable electronics industry has been gaining momentum and several large companies , including Bemis Company and Illinois Tool Works have made investments in printed electronics and industry associations including OE-A and FlexTech Alliance are contributing heavily to the advancement of the printed electronics industry .
Printing spread early to Korea and Japan , which also used Chinese logograms , but the technique was also used in Turpan and Vietnam using a number of other scripts .
This technique then spread to Persia and Russia .
This technique was transmitted to Europe via the Islamic world , and by around 1400 was being used on paper for old master prints and playing cards .
However , Arabs never used this to print the Quran because of the limits imposed by Islamic doctrine .
In early 1817 , Schober introduced Schubert to Johann Michael Vogl , a prominent baritone twenty years Schubert 's senior .
Vogl , for whom Schubert went on to write a great many songs , became one of Schubert 's main proponents in Viennese musical circles .
He also met Joseph Hüttenbrenner -LRB- brother to Anselm -RRB- , who also played a role in promoting Schubert 's music .
These , and an increasing circle of friends and musicians , became responsible for promoting , collecting , and , after his death , preserving his work .
In 1823 Schubert , in addition to Fierrabras , also wrote his first large-scale song cycle , Die schöne Müllerin -LRB- D. 795 -RRB- , setting poems by Wilhelm Müller .
This series , together with the later cycle Winterreise -LRB- D. 911 , also setting texts of Müller in 1827 -RRB- is widely considered one of the pinnacles of Lieder .
Also in that year , symptoms of syphilis first appeared .
In the midst of this creative activity , his health deteriorated .
The cause of his death was officially diagnosed as typhoid fever , though other theories have been proposed , including the tertiary stage of syphilis .
By the late 1820s , Schubert 's health was failing and he confided to some friends that he feared that he was near death .
In the late summer of 1828 , the composer saw court physician Ernst Rinna , who may have confirmed Schubert 's suspicions that he was ill beyond cure and likely to die soon .
Some of his symptoms matched those of mercury poisoning -LRB- mercury was then a common treatment for syphilis , again suggesting that Schubert suffered from it -RRB- .
He was generally unable to retain solid food and his condition worsened .
Schubert died in Vienna , at age 31 , on 19 November 1828 , at the apartment of his brother Ferdinand .
The last musical work he had wished to hear was Beethoven 's String Quartet No. 14 in C-sharp minor , Op. 131 ; his friend , violinist Karl Holz , who was present at the gathering , five days before Schubert 's death , commented : `` The King of Harmony has sent the King of Song a friendly bidding to the crossing '' .
It was next to Beethoven , whom he had admired all his life , that Schubert was buried by his own request , in the village cemetery of Währing , Vienna .
While he was clearly influenced by the Classical sonata forms of Beethoven and Mozart -LRB- his early works , among them notably the 5th Symphony , are particularly Mozartean -RRB- , his formal structures and his developments tend to give the impression more of melodic development than of harmonic drama .
This combination of Classical form and long-breathed Romantic melody sometimes lends them a discursive style : his Great C major Symphony was described by Robert Schumann as running to `` heavenly lengths '' .
His harmonic innovations include movements in which the first section ends in the key of the subdominant rather than the dominant -LRB- as in the last movement of the Trout Quintet -RRB- .
Schubert 's practice here was a forerunner of the common Romantic technique of relaxing , rather than raising , tension in the middle of a movement , with final resolution postponed to the very end .
When Schubert died he had around 100 opus numbers published , mainly songs , chamber music and smaller piano compositions .
Publication of smaller pieces continued -LRB- including opus numbers up to 173 in 1860s , 50 instalments with songs published by Diabelli and dozens of first publications Peters -RRB- , but the manuscripts of many of the longer works , whose existence was not widely known , remained hidden in cabinets and file boxes of Schubert 's family , friends , and publishers .
In 1838 Robert Schumann , on a visit to Vienna , found the dusty manuscript of the C major Symphony -LRB- D. 944 -RRB- and took it back to Leipzig where it was performed by Felix Mendelssohn and celebrated in the Neue Zeitschrift .
The travellers rescued from oblivion seven symphonies , the Rosamunde incidental music , some of the masses and operas , several chamber works , and a vast quantity of miscellaneous pieces and songs .
This led to more widespread public interest in Schubert 's work .
Schubert 's chamber music continues to be popular .
In a poll , the results of which were announced in October 2008 , the ABC in Australia found that Schubert 's chamber works dominated the field , with the Trout Quintet coming first , followed by two of his other works .
At the end of 1813 , he left the Stadtkonvikt and returned home for teacher training at the Normalhauptschule .
For over two years young Schubert endured such drudgery , dragging himself through it with resounding indifference .
He continued to take private lessons in composition from Salieri , who gave Schubert more actual technical training than any of his other teachers , before they parted ways in 1817 .
The morphologic variations in the size , shape , volume , tissue density , pectoral locale , and spacing of the breasts determine their natural shape , appearance , and position on a woman 's chest .
Breast size and other characteristics do not predict the fat-to-milk-gland ratio or the potential for the woman to nurse an infant .
The size and the shape of the breasts are influenced by normal-life hormonal changes -LRB- thelarche , menstruation , pregnancy , menopause -RRB- and medical conditions -LRB- e.g. virginal breast hypertrophy -RRB- .
The shape of the breasts is naturally determined by the support of the suspensory Cooper 's ligaments , the underlying muscle and bone structures of the chest , and by the skin envelope .
The suspensory ligaments sustain the breast from the clavicle -LRB- collarbone -RRB- and the clavico-pectoral fascia -LRB- collarbone and chest -RRB- by traversing and encompassing the fat and milk-gland tissues .
The breast is positioned , affixed to , and supported upon the chest wall , while its shape is established and maintained by the skin envelope .
While it has been a common belief that breastfeeding causes breasts to sag , researchers have found that a woman 's breasts sag due to four key factors : cigarette smoking , number of pregnancies , gravity , and weight loss or gain .
If a woman is uncomfortable with her breasts ' asymmetry and the variance is relatively minor , she can minimize the difference with a corrective or padded bra or by the use of gel bra inserts .
However , if there is a significant difference in breast size , she should consult a doctor to establish the cause .
Breast asymmetry is related to several known risk factors for breast cancer , but only three percent of mammograms of women with asymmetrical breasts result in a cancer diagnoses .
Types of breast asymmetry include bilateral asymmetric hypertrophy , unilateral hypertrophy with normal contralateral breast , unilateral hypertrophy with amastia or hypoplasia of the contralateral side , unilateral amastia or hypoplasia with normal contralateral breast , asymmetric bilateral hypoplasia , and unilateral mammary ptosis .
Femen is a feminist activist group which uses topless protests as part of their campaigns against sex tourism religious institutions , sexism , homophobia and to `` defend -LSB- women 's -RSB- right to abortion '' .
Femen activists have been regularly detained by police in response to their protests .
Surgery of the breast presents the health risk of interfering with the ability to breast-feed an infant child , and might include consequences such as altered sensation in the nipple-areola complex , interference with mammography -LRB- breast x-rays images -RRB- when there are breast implants present in the breasts .
Regarding breastfeeding capability after breast reduction surgery , studies reported that women who underwent breast reduction can retain the ability to nurse an infant child , when compared to women in a control group who underwent breast surgery using a modern pedicle surgical technique .
Plastic surgery organizations generally discourage elective cosmetic breast augmentation surgery for teen-aged girls , because , at that age , the volume of the breast tissues -LRB- milk glands and fat -RRB- can continue to grow as the girl matures to womanhood .
Because breasts are mostly fatty tissue , their shape can within limits be molded by clothing , such as foundation garments .
Bras are commonly worn by about 90 % of Western women , and are often worn for support .
The social norm in most Western cultures is to cover breasts in public , though the extent of coverage varies depending on the social context .
Some religions ascribe a special status to the female breast , either in formal teachings or through symbolism .
Islam forbids women from exposing their breasts in public .
The breast is an apocrine gland that produces milk to feed an infant .
The nipple of the breast is surrounded by the areola -LRB- nipple-areola complex -RRB- .
Sensation in the breast is provided by the peripheral nervous system innervation by means of the front -LRB- anterior -RRB- and side -LRB- lateral -RRB- cutaneous branches of the fourth - , fifth - , and sixth intercostal nerves .
The T-4 nerve -LRB- Thoracic spinal nerve 4 -RRB- , which innervates the dermatomic area , supplies sensation to the nipple-areola complex .
The areola has many sebacious glands , and the skin color varies from pink to dark brown .
The basic units of the breast are the terminal duct lobular units -LRB- TDLUs -RRB- , which produce the fatty breast milk .
The terminal lactiferous ducts drain the milk from TDLUs into 4 -- 18 lactiferous ducts , which drain to the nipple .
In addition to the milk glands , the breast is also composed of connective tissues -LRB- collagen , elastin -RRB- , white fat , and the suspensory Cooper 's ligaments .
A few languages have so-called syllabic fricatives , also known as fricative vowels , at the phonemic level .
-LRB- In the context of Chinese phonology , the related but non-synonymous term apical vowel is commonly used . -RRB-
Vasco da Gama spent 2 to 29 March 1498 in the vicinity of Mozambique Island .
Fearing the local population would be hostile to Christians , da Gama impersonated a Muslim and gained audience with the Sultan of Mozambique .
With the paltry trade goods he had to offer , the explorer was unable to provide a suitable gift to the ruler .
Soon the local populace became suspicious of da Gama and his men .
Forced by a hostile crowd to flee Mozambique , da Gama departed the harbor , firing his cannons into the city in retaliation .
The fleet arrived in Kappadu near Kozhikode -LRB- Calicut -RRB- , in Malabar Coast -LRB- present day Kerala state of India -RRB- , on 20 May 1498 .
The King of Calicut , the Samudiri -LRB- Zamorin -RRB- , who was at that time staying in his second capital at Ponnani , returned to Calicut on hearing the news of the foreign fleets 's arrival .
The navigator was received with traditional hospitality , including a grand procession of at least 3,000 armed Nairs , but an interview with the Zamorin failed to produce any concrete results .
The presents that da Gama sent to the Zamorin as gifts from Dom Manuel -- four cloaks of scarlet cloth , six hats , four branches of corals , twelve almasares , a box with seven brass vessels , a chest of sugar , two barrels of oil and a cask of honey -- were trivial , and failed to impress .
While Zamorin 's officials wondered at why there was no gold or silver , the Muslim merchants who considered da Gama their rival suggested that the latter was only an ordinary pirate and not a royal ambassador .
Vasco da Gama 's request for permission to leave a factor behind him in charge of the merchandise he could not sell was turned down by the King , who insisted that da Gama pay customs duty -- preferably in gold -- like any other trader , which strained the relation between the two .
Annoyed by this , da Gama carried a few Nairs and sixteen fishermen -LRB- mukkuva -RRB- off with him by force .
Nevertheless , da Gama 's expedition was successful beyond all reasonable expectation , bringing in cargo that was worth sixty times the cost of the expedition .
After decades of sailors trying to reach the Indies , with thousands of lives and dozens of vessels lost in shipwrecks and attacks , da Gama landed in Calicut on 20 May 1498 .
Unopposed access to the Indian spice routes boosted the economy of the Portuguese Empire , which was previously based along northern and coastal West Africa .
The spices obtained from Southeast Asia were primarily pepper and cinnamon at first , but soon included other products , all new to Europe .
Portugal maintained a commercial monopoly of these commodities for several decades .
It would be a century later before other European powers such as the Netherlands and England , followed by France and Denmark , were able to challenge Portugal 's monopoly and naval supremacy in the Cape Route .
Little is known of da Gama 's early life .
The Portuguese historian Teixeira de Aragão suggests that he studied at the inland town of Évora , which is where he may have learned mathematics and navigation .
It has been claimed that he studied under Abraham Zacuto , an astrologer and astronomer , but Da Gama 's biographer Subrahmanyam thinks this dubious .
On 23 March 2012 , U.S. President Barack Obama announced that the United States would nominate Jim Yong Kim as the next president of the Bank .
In 2010 voting powers at the World Bank were revised to increase the voice of developing countries , notably China .
Under the changes , known as ` Voice Reform -- Phase 2 ' , countries other than China that saw significant gains included South Korea , Turkey , Mexico , Singapore , Greece , Brazil , India , and Spain .
A Justice Sector Peer-Assisted Learning -LRB- JUSTPAL -RRB- Network was launched in April 2011 by the Poverty Reduction and Economic Management -LRB- PREM -RRB- Department of the World Bank 's Europe and Central Asia -LRB- ECA -RRB- Region .
The JUSTPAL objective is to provide an online and offline platform for justice professionals to exchange knowledge , good practices and peer-driven improvements to justice systems and thereby support countries to improve their justice sector performance , quality of justice and service delivery to citizens and businesses .
In 1980 McNamara was succeeded by US President Jimmy Carter 's nominee , Alden W. Clausen .
Clausen replaced many members of McNamara 's staff and crafted a different mission emphasis .
His 1982 decision to replace the bank 's Chief Economist , Hollis B. Chenery , with Anne Krueger was an example of this new focus .
Krueger was known for her criticism of development funding and for describing Third World governments as `` rent-seeking states . ''
Examples are the numerous large sacrificial tripods known as dings in Chinese ; there are many other distinct shapes .
Surviving identified Chinese ritual bronzes tend to be highly decorated , often with the taotie motif , which involves highly stylized animal faces .
These appear in three main motif types : those of demons , of symbolic animals , and of abstract symbols .
Many large bronzes also bear cast inscriptions that are the great bulk of the surviving body of early Chinese writing and have helped historians and archaeologists piece together the history of China , especially during the Zhou Dynasty -LRB- 1046 -- 256 BC -RRB- .
Dating back to the Neolithic Age , the first bronze drums , called the Dong Son drums , have been uncovered in and around the Red River Delta regions of Vietnam and Southern China .
These relate to the prehistoric Dong Son Culture of Vietnam .
In Ban Chiang , Thailand , -LRB- Southeast Asia -RRB- bronze artifacts have been discovered dating to 2100 BC .
However , according to the radiocarbon dating on the human and pig bones in Ban Chiang , some scholars propose that the initial Bronze Age in Ban Chiang was in late 2nd millennium .
In Nyaunggan , Burma , bronze tools have been excavated along with ceramics and stone artifacts .
Dating is still currently broad -LRB- 3500 -- 500 BC -RRB- .
Ban Non Wat , excavated by Charles Higham , was a rich site with over 640 graves excavated that gleaned many complex bronze items that may have had social value connected to them .
What 's interesting about this site , however , is n't just the old age of the artifacts but the fact that this technology suggested on-site casting from the very beginning .
The on-site casting supports the theory that Bronze was first introduced in Southeast Asia as fully developed which therefore shows that Bronze was actually innovated from a different country .
Some scholars believe that the copper-based metallurgy was disseminated from northwest and central China via south and southwest areas such as Guangdong province and Yunnan province and finally into southeast Asia around 1,000 BC .
Open skies policies and low-cost carriers have helped to bring competition to the market .
In the 1990s , the growth of low-cost communication networks cut the cost of communicating between different countries .
More work can be performed using a computer without regard to location .
The term globalization is derived from the word globalize , which refers to the emergence of an international network of economic systems .
One of the earliest known usages of the term as a noun was in a 1930 publication entitled Towards New Education , where it denoted a holistic view of human experience in education .
A related term , corporate giants , was coined by Charles Taze Russell -LRB- of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society -RRB- in 1897 to refer to the largely national trusts and other large enterprises of the time .
By the 1960s , both terms began to be used as synonyms by economists and other social scientists .
Economist Theodore Levitt is widely credited with coining the term in an article entitled `` Globalization of Markets '' , which appeared in the May -- June 1983 issue of Harvard Business Review .
However , the term ` globalization ' was in use well before this -LRB- at least as early as 1944 -RRB- and had been used by other scholars as early as 1981 .
Levitt can be credited with popularizing the term and bringing it into the mainstream business audience in the later half of the 1980s .
Since its inception , the concept of globalization has inspired competing definitions and interpretations , with antecedents dating back to the great movements of trade and empire across Asia and the Indian Ocean from the 15th century onwards .
Due to the complexity of the concept , research projects , articles , and discussions often remain focused on a single aspect of globalization .
One influential event was the late 2000s recession , which was associated with lower growth -LRB- in areas such as cross-border phone calls and Skype usage -RRB- or even temporarily negative growth -LRB- in areas such as trade -RRB- of global interconnectedness .
The DHL Global Connectedness Index studies four main types of cross-border flow : trade -LRB- in both goods and services -RRB- , information , people -LRB- including tourists , students , and migrants -RRB- , and capital .
It shows that the depth of global integration fell by about one-tenth after 2008 , but by 2013 had recovered well above its pre-crash peak .
The report also found a shift of economic activity to emerging economies .
The term globalization implies transformation .
Cultural practices including traditional music can be lost or turned into a fusion of traditions .
Globalization can trigger a state of emergency for the preservation of musical heritage .
Archivists may attempt to collect , record , or transcribe repertoires before melodies are assimilated or modified , while local musicians may struggle for authenticity and to preserve local musical traditions .
Globalization can lead performers to discard traditional instruments .
Fusion genres can become interesting fields of analysis .
Measurements of economic globalization typically focus on variables such as trade , Foreign Direct Investment -LRB- FDI -RRB- , Gross Domestic Product -LRB- GDP -RRB- , portfolio investment , and income .
However , newer indices attempt to measure globalization in more general terms , including variables related to political , social , cultural , and even environmental aspects of globalization .
Quoting Harvard economics professor N. Gregory Mankiw , `` Few propositions command as much consensus among professional economists as that open world trade increases economic growth and raises living standards . ''
In a survey of leading economists , none disagreed with the notion that `` freer trade improves productive efficiency and offers consumers better choices , and in the long run these gains are much larger than any effects on employment . ''
Most economists would agree that although increasing returns to scale might mean that certain industry could settle in a geographical area without any strong economic reason derived from comparative advantage , this is not a reason to argue against free trade because the absolute level of output enjoyed by both `` winner '' and `` loser '' will increase with the `` winner '' gaining more than the `` loser '' but both gaining more than before in an absolute level .
Certain demographic changes in the developing world after active economic liberalization and international integration resulted in rising general welfare and , hence , reduced inequality .
According to Wolf , in the developing world as a whole , life expectancy rose by four months each year after 1970 and infant mortality rate declined from 107 per thousand in 1970 to 58 in 2000 due to improvements in standards of living and health conditions .
Also , adult literacy in developing countries rose from 53 % in 1970 to 74 % in 1998 and much lower illiteracy rate among the young guarantees that rates will continue to fall as time passes .
Furthermore , the reduction in fertility rate in the developing world as a whole from 4.1 births per woman in 1980 to 2.8 in 2000 indicates improved education level of women on fertility , and control of fewer children with more parental attention and investment .
Consequently , more prosperous and educated parents with fewer children have chosen to withdraw their children from the labor force to give them opportunities to be educated at school improving the issue of child labor .
Thus , despite seemingly unequal distribution of income within these developing countries , their economic growth and development have brought about improved standards of living and welfare for the population as a whole .
Baha'i - inspired author Gregory Paul Meyjes embraces the single world community and emergent global consciousness but warns of globalization as a cloak for an expeditious economic , social , and cultural Anglo-dominance that may be insufficiently fertile to sustain the emergence of a world civilization .
The movement is also commonly referred to as the alter-globalization movement , anti-globalist movement , anti-corporate globalization movement , or movement against neoliberal globalization .
It can be explained as encompassing the ideologies present in the following other `` movements '' , which will be discussed below : opposition to capital market integration , social injustice and inequality , anti-consumerism , anti-global governance and environmentalist opposition .
Each of these ideologies can be framed around a specific strand of the anti-globalization movement , but in general the movement gears their efforts towards all of these primary principles .
It is considered a rather new and modern day social movement , as the issues it is fighting against are relevant in today 's time .
This refers to the continent of Africa being colonized and stripped of their resources by the Europeans in the 19th century .
A related contemporary ideology , consumerism , which encourages the personal acquisition of goods and services , also drives globalization .
Anti-consumerism is a social movement against equating personal happiness with consumption and the purchase of material possessions .
Concern over the treatment of consumers by large corporations has spawned substantial activism , and the incorporation of consumer education into school curricula .
Social activists hold materialism is connected to global retail merchandizing and supplier convergence , war , greed , anomie , crime , environmental degradation , and general social malaise and discontent .
If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object , it can not be a black hole .
By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object .
If this is much larger than the Tolman -- Oppenheimer -- Volkoff limit -LRB- that is , the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses -RRB- then the object can not be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole .
The first strong candidate for a black hole , Cygnus X-1 , was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton , Louise Webster and Paul Murdin in 1972 .
Some doubt , however , remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole .
Currently , better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients .
Moreover , these systems are actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10 -- 50 years .
During the period of low X-ray emission -LRB- called quiescence -RRB- , the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period .
Consequently , the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane .
For example , a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects .
However , such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates .
In order to resolve the paradox , physicists may eventually be forced to give up one of three time-tested theories : Einstein 's equivalence principle , unitarity , or existing quantum field theory .
One possible solution , which violates the equivalence principle , is that a `` firewall '' destroys incoming particles at the event horizon .
A 2016 analysis of LIGO data shows tentative signs of echoes caused by a fuzzy event horizon ; such echoes may be possible in firewall or fuzzball theories but should not occur in classical general relativity .
Over the next two years , additional LIGO data should establish whether the echoes were just random noise , or whether they are instead evidence of a violation of classical general relativity .
In evolutionary terms , individuals should help relatives when Cost < Relatedness * Benefit .
Conversely , many bees are haplodiploid yet are not eusocial , and among eusocial species many queens mate with multiple males , creating half-sisters that share only 25 % of their genes .
But , monogamy -LRB- queens mating singly -RRB- is the ancestral state for all eusocial species so far investigated , so it is likely that haplodiploidy contributed to the evolution of eusociality in bees .
The requirements for eusociality are more easily fulfilled by haplodiploid species such as bees because of their unusual relatedness structure .
In haplodiploid species , females develop from fertilized eggs and males from unfertilized eggs .
This mechanism of sex determination gives rise to what W. D. Hamilton termed `` supersisters '' , more closely related to their sisters than they would be to their own offspring .
Workers often do not reproduce , but they can pass on more of their genes by helping to raise their sisters -LRB- as queens -RRB- than they would by having their own offspring -LRB- each of which would only have 50 % of their genes -RRB- , assuming they would produce similar numbers .
This unusual situation has been proposed as an explanation of the multiple independent evolutions of eusociality -LRB- arising at least nine separate times -RRB- within the Hymenoptera .
Their colonies are established by swarms , consisting of a queen and several hundred workers .
Africanized bees are a hybrid strain of A. mellifera that escaped from experiments involving crossing European and African subspecies ; they are extremely defensive .
Most other bees , including familiar insects such as carpenter bees , leafcutter bees and mason bees are solitary in the sense that every female is fertile , and typically inhabits a nest she constructs herself .
There is no division of labor so these nests lack queens and worker bees for these species .
Solitary bees typically produce neither honey nor beeswax .
The life cycle of a bee , be it a solitary or social species , involves the laying of an egg , the development through several moults of a legless larva , a pupation stage during which the insect undergoes complete metamorphosis , followed by the emergence of a winged adult .
Most solitary bees and bumble bees in temperate climates overwinter as adults or pupae and emerge in spring when increasing numbers of flowering plants come into bloom .
The males usually emerge first and search for females with which to mate .
The sex of a bee is determined by whether or not the egg is fertilised ; after mating , a female stores the sperm , and determines which sex is required at the time each individual egg is laid , fertilised eggs producing female offspring and unfertilised eggs , males .
The highly eusocial corbiculate Apidae appeared roughly 87 Mya , and the Allodapini -LRB- within the Apidae -RRB- around 53 Mya .
The Colletidae appear as fossils only from the late Oligocene -LRB- ~ 25 Mya -RRB- to early Miocene .
The Melittidae are known from Palaeomacropis eocenicus in the Early Eocene .
The Megachilidae are known from trace fossils -LRB- characteristic leaf cuttings -RRB- from the Middle Eocene .
The Andrenidae are known from the Eocene-Oligocene boundary , around 34 Mya , of the Florissant shale .
The Halictidae first appear in the Early Eocene with species found in amber .
The Stenotritidae are known from fossil brood cells of Pleistocene age .
As previously addressed , Secale cereale can survive through many climates and in many environments .
Researchers have pinpointed certain proteins that are responsible for the antifreeze properties , which are proteins that help the organism remain alive in subzero environments .
In conclusion , S. cereale can be used in varying environments .
This species ' capability occurs in a different manner from the antifreeze property of some fish and insects that also have antifreeze characteristic .
Specifically , the leaves of winter S. cereale produce various polypeptides that possess the antifreeze capability which are different than the antifreeze polypeptides produced by fish and insects .
In addition to these survival capabilities under high stress circumstances , S. cereale is known to improve the soil caliber in the gentle paddies in which it lives ; however , there has been evidence to suggest that its biomass has increased greenhouse gas emissions .
Specifically , methane is released during its cultivation .
Moreover , this research also suggests that the biomass of this plant changes at different stages of growth , so it can be minimized by selecting a specific growth stage in which it is harvested .
The methane production of S. cereale was heightened during the pre-maturing stage of development .
Like wheat , barley , and their hybrids and derivatives , rye contains gluten , which makes it an unsuitable grain for consumption by people with gluten-related disorders , such as celiac disease , non-celiac gluten sensitivity , and wheat allergy , among others .
Nevertheless , some wheat allergy patients can tolerate rye or barley .
Fish typically have quite small brains relative to body size compared with other vertebrates , typically one-fifteenth the brain mass of a similarly sized bird or mammal .
As well as controlling some muscles and body organs , in bony fish at least , the brain stem governs respiration and osmoregulation .
In ovoviviparous fish the eggs develop inside the mother 's body after internal fertilization but receive little or no nourishment directly from the mother , depending instead on the yolk .
Each embryo develops in its own egg .
Familiar examples of ovoviviparous fish include guppies , angel sharks , and coelacanths .
Like other animals , fish suffer from diseases and parasites .
Non-specific defenses include the skin and scales , as well as the mucus layer secreted by the epidermis that traps and inhibits the growth of microorganisms .
If pathogens breach these defenses , fish can develop an inflammatory response that increases blood flow to the infected region and delivers white blood cells that attempt to destroy pathogens .
Specific defenses respond to particular pathogens recognised by the fish 's body , i.e. , an immune response .
In recent years , vaccines have become widely used in aquaculture and also with ornamental fish , for example furunculosis vaccines in farmed salmon and koi herpes virus in koi .
At the end of the 16th century , England and the Netherlands began to challenge Portugal 's monopoly of trade with Asia , forming private joint-stock companies to finance the voyages -- the English , later British , East India Company and the Dutch East India Company , chartered in 1600 and 1602 respectively .
The primary aim of these companies was to tap into the lucrative spice trade , an effort focused mainly on two regions ; the East Indies archipelago , and an important hub in the trade network , India .
Although England ultimately eclipsed the Netherlands as a colonial power , in the short term the Netherlands ' more advanced financial system and the three Anglo-Dutch Wars of the 17th century left it with a stronger position in Asia .
Hostilities ceased after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 when the Dutch William of Orange ascended the English throne , bringing peace between the Netherlands and England .
A deal between the two nations left the spice trade of the East Indies archipelago to the Netherlands and the textiles industry of India to England , but textiles soon overtook spices in terms of profitability , and by 1720 , in terms of sales , the British company had overtaken the Dutch .
During the 1760s and early 1770s , relations between the Thirteen Colonies and Britain became increasingly strained , primarily because of resentment of the British Parliament 's attempts to govern and tax American colonists without their consent .
The American Revolution began with rejection of Parliamentary authority and moves towards self-government .
In response Britain sent troops to reimpose direct rule , leading to the outbreak of war in 1775 .
The following year , in 1776 , the United States declared independence .
The entry of France into the war in 1778 tipped the military balance in the Americans ' favour and after a decisive defeat at Yorktown in 1781 , Britain began negotiating peace terms .
American independence was acknowledged at the Peace of Paris in 1783 .
The Napoleonic Wars were therefore ones in which Britain invested large amounts of capital and resources to win .
French ports were blockaded by the Royal Navy , which won a decisive victory over a Franco-Spanish fleet at Trafalgar in 1805 .
Overseas colonies were attacked and occupied , including those of the Netherlands , which was annexed by Napoleon in 1810 .
France was finally defeated by a coalition of European armies in 1815 .
Britain was again the beneficiary of peace treaties : France ceded the Ionian Islands , Malta -LRB- which it had occupied in 1797 and 1798 respectively -RRB- , Mauritius , Saint Lucia , and Tobago ; Spain ceded Trinidad ; the Netherlands Guyana , and the Cape Colony .
Britain returned Guadeloupe , Martinique , French Guiana , and Réunion to France , and Java and Suriname to the Netherlands , while gaining control of Ceylon -LRB- 1795 -- 1815 -RRB- .
The East India Company drove the expansion of the British Empire in Asia .
The Company 's army had first joined forces with the Royal Navy during the Seven Years ' War , and the two continued to co-operate in arenas outside India : the eviction of the French from Egypt -LRB- 1799 -RRB- , the capture of Java from the Netherlands -LRB- 1811 -RRB- , the acquisition of Singapore -LRB- 1819 -RRB- and Malacca -LRB- 1824 -RRB- and the defeat of Burma -LRB- 1826 -RRB- .
A similar struggle began in India when the Government of India Act 1919 failed to satisfy demand for independence .
Concerns over communist and foreign plots following the Ghadar Conspiracy ensured that war-time strictures were renewed by the Rowlatt Acts .
This led to tension , particularly in the Punjab region , where repressive measures culminated in the Amritsar Massacre .
In Britain public opinion was divided over the morality of the massacre , between those who saw it as having saved India from anarchy , and those who viewed it with revulsion .
The subsequent Non-Co-Operation movement was called off in March 1922 following the Chauri Chaura incident , and discontent continued to simmer for the next 25 years .
The pro-decolonisation Labour government , elected at the 1945 general election and led by Clement Attlee , moved quickly to tackle the most pressing issue facing the empire : Indian independence .
India 's two major political parties -- the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League -- had been campaigning for independence for decades , but disagreed as to how it should be implemented .
Congress favoured a unified secular Indian state , whereas the League , fearing domination by the Hindu majority , desired a separate Islamic state for Muslim-majority regions .
Increasing civil unrest and the mutiny of the Royal Indian Navy during 1946 led Attlee to promise independence no later than June 30 , 1948 .
When the urgency of the situation and risk of civil war became apparent , the newly appointed -LRB- and last -RRB- Viceroy , Lord Mountbatten , hastily brought forward the date to 15 August 1947 .
The borders drawn by the British to broadly partition India into Hindu and Muslim areas left tens of millions as minorities in the newly independent states of India and Pakistan .
Millions of Muslims subsequently crossed from India to Pakistan and Hindus vice versa , and violence between the two communities cost hundreds of thousands of lives .
Burma , which had been administered as part of the British Raj , and Sri Lanka gained their independence the following year in 1948 .
India , Pakistan and Sri Lanka became members of the Commonwealth , while Burma chose not to join .
Stable or mostly stable Of the stratiform group , high-level cirrostratus comprises two species .
Cirrostratus nebulosus has a rather diffuse appearance lacking in structural detail .
Cirrostratus fibratus is a species made of semi-merged filaments that are transitional to or from cirrus .
Mid-level altostratus and multi-level nimbostratus always have a flat or diffuse appearance and are therefore not subdivided into species .
Low-étage stratus is of the species nebulosus except when broken up into ragged sheets of stratus fractus -LRB- see below -RRB- .
Cirriform clouds have three non-convective species that can form in mostly stable airmass conditions .
Cirrus fibratus comprise filaments that may be straight , wavy , or occasionally twisted by non-convective wind shear .
The species uncinus is similar but has upturned hooks at the ends .
Cirrus spissatus appear as opaque patches that can show light grey shading .
Another variety , duplicatus -LRB- closely spaced layers of the same type , one above the other -RRB- , is sometimes found with cirrus of both the fibratus and uncinus species , and with altocumulus and stratocumulus of the species stratiformis and lenticularis .
The variety undulatus -LRB- having a wavy undulating base -RRB- can occur with any clouds of the species stratiformis or lenticularis , and with altostratus .
The variety lacunosus is caused by localized downdrafts that create circular holes in the form of a honeycomb or net .
Fall streaks consisting of virga or wisps of cirrus are usually seen beneath the hole as ice crystals fall out to a lower altitude .
This type of hole is usually larger than typical lacunosus holes , and a formal recommendation has been made to classify it as a supplementary feature , possibly with the Latin name cavus .
Clouds initially form in clear air or become clouds when fog rises above surface level .
The genus of a newly formed cloud is determined mainly by air mass characteristics such as stability and moisture content .
If these characteristics change over time , the genus tends to change accordingly .
When this happens , the original genus is called a mother cloud .
If the mother cloud retains much of its original form after the appearance of the new genus , it is termed a genitus cloud .
One example of this is stratocumulus cumulogenitus , a stratocumulus cloud formed by the partial spreading of a cumulus type when there is a loss of convective lift .
If the mother cloud undergoes a complete change in genus , it is considered to be a mutatus cloud .
Low and vertical heaps of cumulus , towering cumulus , and cumulonimbus are made of larger water droplets ranging in radius from 0.005 to about 0.015 mm .
These larger droplets associated with vertically developed clouds are better able to trap the long-wave radiation thus mitigating the cooling effect to some degree .
Type 1 -LRB- Non-nacreous -RRB- : This type contains frozen or supercooled nitric acid and water droplets and lacks any special coloration .
It is dividable into subtype 1A which is mostly made up of water ice crystals and frozen nitric acid , 1B which consists of supercooled droplets of nitric and sulfuric acid , and subtype 1C which comprises small particles of nitric acid .
Nacreous type 2 is sometimes associated or embedded .
Type I non-nacreous clouds are known to have harmful effects over the polar regions of Earth .
They become catalysts which convert relatively benign man-made chlorine into active free radicals like chlorine monoxide which are destructive of the stratospheric ozone layer .
Type 4 : This shows whirls in the form of partial or rarely complete rings with dark centers .
4B is characterized by simple curves of medium angular radius with one or more bands .
Ongoing research indicates that convective lift in the mesosphere is strong enough during the polar summer to cause adiabatic cooling of small amount of water vapour to the point of saturation .
This tends to produce the coldest temperatures in the entire atmosphere just below the mesopause .
These conditions result in the best environment for the formation of polar mesospheric clouds .
There is also evidence that smoke particles from burnt-up meteors provide much of the condensation nuclei required for the formation of noctilucent cloud .
Burning coal also generates large amounts of bottom ash and fly ash .
These materials are used in a wide variety of applications , utilizing , for example , about 40 % of the US production .
The surviving part of the outer wall 's monumental façade comprises three stories of superimposed arcades surmounted by a podium on which stands a tall attic , both of which are pierced by windows interspersed at regular intervals .
The arcades are framed by half-columns of the Doric , Ionic , and Corinthian orders , while the attic is decorated with Corinthian pilasters .
Each of the arches in the second - and third-floor arcades framed statues , probably honoring divinities and other figures from Classical mythology .
The next level up , the maenianum secundum , was originally reserved for ordinary Roman citizens -LRB- plebeians -RRB- and was divided into two sections .
Specific sectors were provided for other social groups : for instance , boys with their tutors , soldiers on leave , foreign dignitaries , scribes , heralds , priests and so on .
Stone -LRB- and later marble -RRB- seating was provided for the citizens and nobles , who presumably would have brought their own cushions with them .
Inscriptions identified the areas reserved for specific groups .
Another level , the maenianum secundum in legneis , was added at the very top of the building during the reign of Domitian .
This comprised a gallery for the common poor , slaves and women .
Some groups were banned altogether from the Colosseum , notably gravediggers , actors and former gladiators .
For instance , Pope Benedict XVI led the Stations of the Cross called the Scriptural Way of the Cross -LRB- which calls for more meditation -RRB- at the Colosseum on Good Fridays .
The Colosseum is generally regarded by Christians as a site of the martyrdom of large numbers of believers during the persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire , as evidenced by Church history and tradition .
On the other hand , other scholars believe that the majority of martyrdoms may have occurred at other venues within the city of Rome , rather than at the Colosseum , citing a lack of still-intact physical evidence or historical records .
These scholars assert that `` some Christians were executed as common criminals in the Colosseum -- their crime being refusal to reverence the Roman gods '' , but most Christian martyrs of the early Church were executed for their faith at the Circus Maximus .
According to Irenæus -LRB- died about 202 -RRB- , Ignatius of Antioch was fed to the lions in Rome around 107 A.D and although Irenaeus says nothing about this happening at the Colosseum , tradition ascribes it to that place .
In the 8th century , a famous epigram attributed to the Venerable Bede celebrated the symbolic significance of the statue in a prophecy that is variously quoted : Quamdiu stat Colisæus , stat et Roma ; quando cadet colisæus , cadet et Roma ; quando cadet Roma , cadet et mundus -LRB- `` as long as the Colossus stands , so shall Rome ; when the Colossus falls , Rome shall fall ; when Rome falls , so falls the world '' -RRB- .
This is often mistranslated to refer to the Colosseum rather than the Colossus -LRB- as in , for instance , Byron 's poem Childe Harold 's Pilgrimage -RRB- .
However , at the time that the Pseudo-Bede wrote , the masculine noun coliseus was applied to the statue rather than to what was still known as the Flavian amphitheatre .
Hearing loss due to noise may be temporary , called a ` temporary threshold shift ' , a reduced sensitivity to sound over a wide frequency range resulting from exposure to a brief but very loud noise like a gunshot , firecracker , jet engine , jackhammer , etc. or to exposure to loud sound over a few hours such as during a pop concert or nightclub session .
Recovery of hearing is usually within 24 hours , but may take up to a week .
Hearing loss may be caused by a number of factors , including : genetics , ageing , exposure to noise , some infections , birth complications , trauma to the ear , and certain medications or toxins .
A common condition that results in hearing loss is chronic ear infections .
Certain infections during pregnancy such as syphilis and rubella may also cause hearing loss .
Hearing loss is diagnosed when hearing testing finds that a person is unable to hear 25 decibels in at least one ear .
Testing for poor hearing is recommended for all newborns .
Hearing loss can be categorised as mild , moderate , moderate-severe , severe , or profound .
A case history -LRB- usually a written form , with questionnaire -RRB- can provide valuable information about the context of the hearing loss , and indicate what kind of diagnostic procedures to employ .
There is no treatment surgical or otherwise for hearing lost due to the most common causes -LRB- age , noise and genetic defects -RRB- .
For a few specific conditions , surgical intervention can provide a remedy :
In 756 , the Abbasid Caliph Al-Mansur sent over 4,000 Arab mercenaries to assist the Chinese Tang dynasty in the An Shi Rebellion against An Lushan .
Al-Rashid sent embassies to the Chinese Tang dynasty and established good relations with them .
After the war , these embassies remained in China with Caliph Harun al-Rashid establishing an alliance with China .
Several embassies from the Abbasid Caliphs to the Chinese court have been recorded in the T'ang Annals , the most important of these being those of Abul Abbas al-Saffah , the founder of the Abbasid dynasty , Abu Jafar and Harun al-Rashid .
Copts were employed in the textile industry and produced linens and silks .
In a town named Tuna near Tinnis , was made the kiswah for the kaaba in Mecca .
Fine silk was also made in Dabik and Damietta .
Some of the finer pieces were colored in such a manner as to require six separate stamps to achieve the proper design and color .
Shaikh Hassan 's grandsons , Shaikh Mohamed Saeed -LRB- b. 1096 AH -- d. 1152 AH -RRB- and Shaikh Mohamed Khan -LRB- b. 1113 AH -- d. 1197 AH -RRB- son of Shaikh Abdulqader son of Shaikh Hassan , became the first two Abbasid rulers of the region .
In 1137 AH , Shaikh Mohamed Saeed began gathering support for an armed force .
God is most often held to be incorporeal -LRB- immaterial -RRB- , and to be without gender , yet the concept of God actively creating the universe -LRB- as opposed to passively -RRB- has caused many religions to describe God using masculine terminology , using such terms as `` Him '' or `` Father '' .
Furthermore , some religions -LRB- such as Judaism -RRB- attribute only a purely grammatical `` gender '' to God .
While representations of God the Father were growing in Italy , Spain , Germany and the Low Countries , there was resistance elsewhere in Europe , even during the 17th century .
In 1632 most members of the Star Chamber court in England -LRB- except the Archbishop of York -RRB- condemned the use of the images of the Trinity in church windows , and some considered them illegal .
Later in the 17th century Sir Thomas Browne wrote that he considered the representation of God the Father using an old man `` a dangerous act '' that might lead to Egyptian symbolism .
In 1847 , Charles Winston was still critical of such images as a `` Romish trend '' -LRB- a term used to refer to Roman Catholics -RRB- that he considered best avoided in England .
The Abrahamic conceptions of God include the monotheistic definition of God in Judaism , the trinitarian view of Christians , and the Islamic concept of God .
The dharmic religions differ in their view of the divine : views of God in Hinduism vary by region , sect , and caste , ranging from monotheistic to polytheistic .
Divinity was recognized by the historical Buddha , particularly Śakra and Brahma .
Conceptions of God in the latter developments of the Mahayana tradition give a more prominent place to notions of the divine .
In the United States , an integrated approach to real-time hydrologic computer modelling utilizes observed data from the U.S. Geological Survey -LRB- USGS -RRB- , various cooperative observing networks , various automated weather sensors , the NOAA National Operational Hydrologic Remote Sensing Center -LRB- NOHRSC -RRB- , various hydroelectric companies , etc. combined with quantitative precipitation forecasts -LRB- QPF -RRB- of expected rainfall and/or snow melt to generate daily or as-needed hydrologic forecasts .
The NWS also cooperates with Environment Canada on hydrologic forecasts that affect both the USA and Canada , like in the area of the Saint Lawrence Seaway .
In November 1913 , Tagore learned he had won that year 's Nobel Prize in Literature : the Swedish Academy appreciated the idealistic -- and for Westerners -- accessible nature of a small body of his translated material focussed on the 1912 Gitanjali : Song Offerings .
He was awarded a knighthood by King George V in the 1915 Birthday Honours , but renounced it after the 1919 Jallianwala Bagh massacre .
Jorasanko Thakur Bari -LRB- Bengali : House of the Thakurs -LRB- anglicised to Tagore -RRB- in Jorasanko , north of Kolkata , is the ancestral home of the Tagore family .
It is the house in which Tagore was born .
The Roman Catholic Church gave more financial and social support to the study of astronomy for over six centuries , from the recovery of ancient learning during the late Middle Ages into the Enlightenment , than any other , and , probably , all other , institutions .
Among the Church 's motives was finding the date for Easter .
Radio astronomy uses radiation outside the visible range with wavelengths greater than approximately one millimeter .
Radio astronomy is different from most other forms of observational astronomy in that the observed radio waves can be treated as waves rather than as discrete photons .
Although the scientific discipline of astronomy has made tremendous strides in understanding the nature of the Universe and its contents , there remain some important unanswered questions .
Answers to these may require the construction of new ground - and space-based instruments , and possibly new developments in theoretical and experimental physics .
Breaches occurred regardless : one at Henglong in 1034 divided the course in three and repeatedly flooded the northern regions of Dezhou and Bozhou .
The Song worked for five years futilely attempting to restore the previous course -- using over 35,000 employees , 100,000 conscripts , and 220,000 tons of wood and bamboo in a single year -- before abandoning the project in 1041 .
The more sluggish river then occasioned a breach at Shanghu that sent the main outlet north towards Tianjin in 1048 and by 1194 blocked the mouth of the Huai River .
The buildup of silt deposits was such that even after the Yellow River later shifted its course , the Huai could no longer flow along its historic course , but instead , its water pools into Hongze Lake and then runs southward toward the Yangtze River .
The river is commonly divided into three stages .
However , different scholars have different opinions on how the three stages are divided .
This article adopts the division used by the Yellow River Conservancy Commission .
Flowing east at the eastern edge of the Amne Machin Mountains , the Yellow River enters Maqu County in Gansu .
Here , the river skirts through the high-altitude peat bog known as the Zoigê Wetlands and makes a sharp turn towards the northwest forming the border between Maqu and Zoigê County in Sichuan .
Flowing now along the northern edge of Amne Machin , the river reenters Qinghai and gradually curves north towards the Longyang Gorge at Xinghai .
The Yellow River is notable for the large amount of silt it carries -- 1.6 billion tons annually at the point where it descends from the Loess Plateau .
One estimate gives 34 kilograms of silt per cubic meter as opposed to 10 for the Colorado and 1 for the Nile .
The Great Wall concept was revived again under the Ming in the 14th century , and following the Ming army 's defeat by the Oirats in the Battle of Tumu .
The Ming had failed to gain a clear upper hand over the Mongolian tribes after successive battles , and the long-drawn conflict was taking a toll on the empire .
The Ming adopted a new strategy to keep the nomadic tribes out by constructing walls along the northern border of China .
Acknowledging the Mongol control established in the Ordos Desert , the wall followed the desert 's southern edge instead of incorporating the bend of the Yellow River .
As a journalist expressed the concerns of some who feared that he would violate civil liberties , de Gaulle retorted vehemently : `` Have I ever done that ?
De Gaulle did not wish to repeat the difficulty the Free French movement experienced in establishing legitimacy as the rightful government .
He told an aide that the rebel generals `` will not find de Gaulle in their baggage '' .
In the context of a population boom unseen in France since the 18th century , the government intervened heavily in the economy , using dirigisme -- a unique combination of free-market and state-directed economy -- with indicative five-year plans as its main tool .
This was followed by a rapid transformation and expansion of the French economy .
While at Arras , and in the build-up to World War I , de Gaulle developed a good rapport with his commanding officer , Pétain , with whom he shared a number of ideas on French military affairs , and was often seen on exercise and in officers ' quarters with his superior debating great battles and the likely outcome of any coming war .
They shared the views of many rising young officers that the new methods of warfare meant that traditional tactics were obsolete and cavalry would no longer serve a useful purpose in the age of machine guns and barbed wire .
De Gaulle hosted a superpower summit on 17 May 1960 for arms limitation talks and détente efforts in the wake of the 1960 U-2 incident between United States President Dwight Eisenhower , Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev , and United Kingdom Prime Minister Harold Macmillan .
De Gaulle 's warm relations with Eisenhower were noticed by United States military observers at that time .
De Gaulle told Eisenhower : `` Obviously you can not apologize but you must decide how you wish to handle this .
When Khrushchev condemned the United States U-2 flights , de Gaulle expressed to Khrushchev his disapproval of 18 near-simultaneous secret Soviet satellite overflights of French territory ; Khrushchev denied knowledge of the satellite overflights .
Lieutenant General Vernon A. Walters wrote that after Khrushchev left , `` De Gaulle came over to Eisenhower and took him by the arm .
I was astounded at this statement , and Eisenhower was clearly moved by his unexpected expression of unconditional support '' .
General Walters was struck by de Gaulle 's `` unconditional support '' of the United States during that `` crucial time '' .
De Gaulle then tried to revive the talks by inviting all the delegates to another conference at the Élysée Palace to discuss the situation , but the summit ultimately dissolved in the wake of the U-2 incident .
De Gaulle 's government was criticized within France , particularly for its heavy-handed style .
While the written press and elections were free , and private stations such as Europe 1 were able to broadcast in French from abroad , the state 's ORTF had a monopoly on television and radio .
This monopoly meant that the government was in a position to directly influence broadcast news .
Many factors contributed to a general weariness of sections of the public , particularly the student youth , which led to the events of May 1968 .
He was particularly close to the youngest , Pierre , who so resembled him that presidential bodyguards often saluted him by mistake when he visited his famous brother or accompanied him on official visits .
On 9 November 1970 , two weeks short of what would have been his 80th birthday , Charles de Gaulle died suddenly , despite enjoying very robust health his entire life -LRB- except for a prostate operation a few years earlier -RRB- .
His wife called the doctor and the local priest , but by the time they arrived he had died from a ruptured blood vessel .
His wife asked that she be allowed to inform her family before the news was released .
She was able to contact her daughter in Paris quickly , but their son , who was in the navy , was difficult to track down , so President Georges Pompidou was not informed until 4 am the next morning and announced the general 's death on television some 18 hours after the event .
Although he initially enjoyed good relations with US President John F. Kennedy , who admired his stance against the Soviet Union -- particularly when the Berlin Wall was being built -- and who called him `` a great captain of the Western world '' , their relationship later cooled .
De Gaulle was Kennedy 's most loyal ally during the Cuban Missile Crisis and supported the right that the US claimed to defend its interests in the western hemisphere , in contrast to then German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer who doubted Kennedy 's commitment to Europe and thought the crisis could have been avoided .
De Gaulle accepted that it might be necessary for the United States to take preemptive military action against Cuba , unlike many other European leaders of his time .
De Gaulle was very much admired by the later President Nixon .
After a meeting at the Palace of Versailles just before the general left office , Nixon declared that `` He did not try to put on airs but an aura of majesty seemed to envelop him ... his performance -- and I do not use that word disparagingly -- was breathtaking . ''
On arriving for his funeral several months later , Nixon said of him , `` greatness knows no national boundaries '' .
In 1934 he wrote Vers l'Armée de Métier -LRB- Toward a Professional Army -RRB- , which advocated a professional army based on mobile armored divisions .
Such an army would both compensate for the poor French demography , and be an efficient tool to enforce international law , particularly the Treaty of Versailles , which forbade Germany from rearming .
Ironically the German panzer units , so effectively employed in the invasion of France in 1940 , utilized similar theories , while the French dispersed and wasted their armor .
The book sold only 700 copies in France , but 7,000 copies in Germany , where it was studied by Adolf Hitler .
De Gaulle organised the Free French Forces and the Allies gave increasing support and recognition to de Gaulle 's efforts .
In London in September 1941 de Gaulle formed the Free French National Council , with himself as president .
By early 1942 , the `` Fighting French '' movement , as it was now called , gained rapidly in power and influence ; it overcame Vichy in Syria and Lebanon , adding to its base .
They came into the Free French movement only when Germany invaded Russia in June 1941 .
De Gaulle 's policy then became one of friendship directly with Moscow , but Stalin showed little interest .
In 1942 , de Gaulle created the Normandie-Niemen squadron , a Free French Air Force regiment , in order to fight on the Eastern Front .
It is the only Western allied formation to have fought until the end of the war in the East .
In addition , de Gaulle harboured a suspicion of the British in particular , believing that they were seeking to seize France 's colonial possessions in the Levant .
Winston Churchill was often frustrated at what he perceived as de Gaulle 's patriotic arrogance , but also wrote of his `` immense admiration '' for him during the early days of his British exile .
Although their relationship later became strained , Churchill tried to explain the reasons for de Gaulle 's behaviour in the second volume of his history of World War II :
That evening , the Wehrmacht launched a massive aerial and artillery barrage of Paris in revenge , leaving several thousand dead or injured .
The situation in Paris remained tense , and a few days later de Gaulle , still unsure of the trend of events asked General Eisenhower to send some American troops into Paris as a show of strength .
This he did ` not without some satisfaction ' , and so , on 29 August , the US 28th Infantry Division was rerouted from its journey to the front line and paraded down the Champs Elysees .
There were also a number of new faces in the government , including a literary academic , Georges Pompidou , who had written to one of de Gaulle 's recruiting agents offering his services , and Jean Monnet , who in spite of his past opposition to the General now recognized the need for unity and served as Commissoner for Economic Planning .
Of equal rank to ministers and answerable only to the prime minister , a number of Commissioners of the Republic -LRB- Commissaires de la République -RRB- were appointed to re-establish the democratic institutions of France and to extend the legitimacy of the provisional government .
A number of former Free French associates served as commissioners , including Henri Fréville , Raymond Aubrac and Michel Debré , who was charged with reforming the civil service .
Controversially , de Gaulle also appointed Maurice Papon as Commissioner for Aquitaine in spite of his involvement in the deportation of Jews while serving as a senior police official in the Vichy regime during the occupation .
-LRB- Over the years , Papon remained in high official positions but continued to be implicated in controversial events such as the Paris massacre of 1961 , eventually being convicted of crimes against humanity in 1998 . -RRB-
Keenly aware of the need to seize the initiative and to get the process under firm judicial control , de Gaulle appointed Justice Minister François de Menthon to lead the Legal Purge -LRB- Épuration légale -RRB- to punish traitors and to clear away the traces of the Vichy regime .
Knowing that he would need to reprieve many of the ` economic collaborators ' -- such as police and civil servants who held minor roles under Vichy in order to keep the country running as normally as possible -- he assumed , as head of state , the right to commute death sentences .
Of the near 2,000 people who received the death sentence from the courts , fewer than 800 were executed .
De Gaulle commuted 998 of the 1,554 capital sentences submitted before him , including all those involving women .
Many others were given jail terms or had their voting rights and other legal privileges taken away .
It is generally agreed that the purges were conducted arbitrarily , with often absurdly severe or overly lenient punishments being handed down .
It was also notable that the less well-off people who were unable to pay for lawyers were more harshly treated .
As time went by and feelings grew less intense , a number of people who had held fairly senior positions under the Vichy government -- such as Maurice Papon and René Bousquet -- escaped justice by claiming to have worked secretly for the resistance or to have played a double game , working for the good of France by serving the established order .
International Master -LRB- shortened as IM -RRB- .
The conditions are similar to GM , but less demanding .
Chess is believed to have originated in Eastern India , c. 280 -- 550 , in the Gupta Empire , where its early form in the 6th century was known as chaturaṅga -LRB- Sanskrit : चतुरङ्ग -RRB- , literally four divisions -LSB- of the military -RSB- -- infantry , cavalry , elephants , and chariotry , represented by the pieces that would evolve into the modern pawn , knight , bishop , and rook , respectively .
The earliest evidence of chess is found in the nearby Sassanid Persia around 600 , where the game came to be known by the name chatrang .
Chatrang was taken up by the Muslim world after the Islamic conquest of Persia -LRB- 633 -- 44 -RRB- , where it was then named shatranj , with the pieces largely retaining their Persian names .
The romantic era was characterized by opening gambits -LRB- sacrificing pawns or even pieces -RRB- , daring attacks , and brazen sacrifices .
Many elaborate and beautiful but unsound move sequences called ` combinations ' were played by the masters of the time .
The game was played more for art than theory .
A profound belief that chess merit resided in the players ' genius rather than inherent in the position on the board pervaded chess practice .
Known in the circles of clerics , students , and merchants , chess entered into the popular culture of Middle Ages .
An example is the 209th song of Carmina Burana from the 13th century , which starts with the names of chess pieces , Roch , pedites , regina ...
Six months into the second American tour , Chaplin was invited to join the New York Motion Picture Company .
A representative who had seen his performances thought he could replace Fred Mace , a star of their Keystone Studios who intended to leave .
Chaplin thought the Keystone comedies `` a crude mélange of rough and rumble '' , but liked the idea of working in films and rationalised : `` Besides , it would mean a new life . ''
Mutual were patient with Chaplin 's decreased rate of output , and the contract ended amicably .
His primary concern in finding a new distributor was independence ; Sydney Chaplin , then his business manager , told the press , `` Charlie -LSB- must -RSB- be allowed all the time he needs and all the money for producing -LSB- films -RSB- the way he wants ... It is quality , not quantity , we are after . ''
In June 1917 , Chaplin signed to complete eight films for First National Exhibitors ' Circuit in return for $ 1 million .
It was completed in January 1918 , and Chaplin was given freedom over the making of his pictures .
Chaplin finished editing City Lights in December 1930 , by which time silent films were an anachronism .
A preview before an unsuspecting public audience was not a success , but a showing for the press produced positive reviews .
One journalist wrote , `` Nobody in the world but Charlie Chaplin could have done it .
Given its general release in January 1931 , City Lights proved to be a popular and financial success -- eventually grossing over $ 3 million .
The British Film Institute cites it as Chaplin 's finest accomplishment , and the critic James Agee hails the closing scene as `` the greatest piece of acting and the highest moment in movies '' .
City Lights became Chaplin 's personal favourite of his films and remained so throughout his life .
Chaplin again vocalised his political views in Monsieur Verdoux , criticising capitalism and arguing that the world encourages mass killing through wars and weapons of mass destruction .
Because of this , the film met with controversy when it was released in April 1947 ; Chaplin was booed at the premiere , and there were calls for a boycott .
Monsieur Verdoux was the first Chaplin release that failed both critically and commercially in the United States .
It was more successful abroad , and Chaplin 's screenplay was nominated at the Academy Awards .
Chaplin decided to hold the world premiere of Limelight in London , since it was the setting of the film .
The next day , attorney general James P. McGranery revoked Chaplin 's re-entry permit and stated that he would have to submit to an interview concerning his political views and moral behaviour in order to re-enter the US .
Although McGranery told the press that he had `` a pretty good case against Chaplin '' , Maland has concluded , on the basis of the FBI files that were released in the 1980s , that the US government had no real evidence to prevent Chaplin 's re-entry .
However , when Chaplin received a cablegram informing him of the news , he privately decided to cut his ties with the United States :
The idea that a machine can be broken down into simple movable elements led Archimedes to define the lever , pulley and screw as simple machines .
By the time of the Renaissance this list increased to include the wheel and axle , wedge and inclined plane .
The word machine derives from the Latin word machina , which in turn derives from the Greek -LRB- Doric μαχανά makhana , Ionic μηχανή mekhane `` contrivance , machine , engine '' , a derivation from μῆχος mekhos `` means , expedient , remedy '' -RRB- .
The word mechanical comes from the same Greek roots .
However , the Ancient Greeks probably have borrowed the word `` mekhane '' from the ancient Hebrews .
The word `` Mekhonot '' plural and `` Mekhona '' singular mentioned in the Hebrew Bible - Torah ; these `` Mekhonot '' were the ten contraption on four wheels that stood at the Holy Temple of Jerusalem , built by King Solomon - -LRB- 2 Chronicles 4:14 -RRB- .
The ancient Greeks were familiar with the Hebrew Scriptures and language , and often borrowed words and terms .
The word mechanical refers to the work that has been produced by machines or the machinery .
In the Netherlands , a low-lying country , dams were often applied to block rivers in order to regulate the water level and to prevent the sea from entering the marsh lands .
Such dams often marked the beginning of a town or city because it was easy to cross the river at such a place , and often gave rise to the respective place 's names in Dutch .
The Hoover Dam is a massive concrete arch-gravity dam , constructed in the Black Canyon of the Colorado River , on the border between the US states of Arizona and Nevada between 1931 and 1936 during the Great Depression .
In 1928 , Congress authorized the project to build a dam that would control floods , provide irrigation water and produce hydroelectric power .
The winning bid to build the dam was submitted by a consortium called Six Companies , Inc. .
The torrid summer weather and the lack of facilities near the site also presented difficulties .
Dams can be formed by human agency , natural causes , or even by the intervention of wildlife such as beavers .
Man-made dams are typically classified according to their size -LRB- height -RRB- , intended purpose or structure .
In a gravity dam , the force that holds the dam in place against the push from the water is Earth 's gravity pulling down on the mass of the dam .
The water presses laterally -LRB- downstream -RRB- on the dam , tending to overturn the dam by rotating about its toe -LRB- a point at the bottom downstream side of the dam -RRB- .
The dam 's weight counteracts that force , tending to rotate the dam the other way about its toe .
The designer ensures that the dam is heavy enough that the dam 's weight wins that contest .
In engineering terms , that is true whenever the resultant of the forces of gravity acting on the dam and water pressure on the dam acts in a line that passes upstream of the toe of the dam .
Furthermore , the designer tries to shape the dam so if one were to consider the part of dam above any particular height to be a whole dam itself , that dam also would be held in place by gravity .
The designer does this because it is usually more practical to make a dam of material essentially just piled up than to make the material stick together against vertical tension .
A barrage dam is a special kind of dam which consists of a line of large gates that can be opened or closed to control the amount of water passing the dam .
The gates are set between flanking piers which are responsible for supporting the water load , and are often used to control and stabilize water flow for irrigation systems .
A diversionary dam is a structure designed to divert all or a portion of the flow of a river from its natural course .
The water may be redirected into a canal or tunnel for irrigation and/or hydroelectric power production .
The structure was built around 2800 or 2600 BC as a diversion dam for flood control , but was destroyed by heavy rain during construction or shortly afterwards .
During the Twelfth Dynasty in the 19th century BC , the Pharaohs Senosert III , Amenemhat III and Amenmehat IV dug a canal 16 km -LRB- 9.9 mi -RRB- long linking the Fayum Depression to the Nile in Middle Egypt .
Two dams called Ha-Uar running east-west were built to retain water during the annual flood and then release it to surrounding lands .
The lake called `` Mer-wer '' or Lake Moeris covered 1,700 km2 -LRB- 660 sq mi -RRB- and is known today as Berkat Qaroun .
Common uses for cofferdams include construction and repair of offshore oil platforms .
In such cases the cofferdam is fabricated from sheet steel and welded into place under water .
Air is pumped into the space , displacing the water and allowing a dry work environment below the surface .
Every information exchange between living organisms -- i.e. transmission of signals that involve a living sender and receiver can be considered a form of communication ; and even primitive creatures such as corals are competent to communicate .
Nonhuman communication also include cell signaling , cellular communication , and chemical transmissions between primitive organisms like bacteria and within the plant and fungal kingdoms .
Human language can be defined as a system of symbols -LRB- sometimes known as lexemes -RRB- and the grammars -LRB- rules -RRB- by which the symbols are manipulated .
Language learning normally occurs most intensively during human childhood .
Most of the thousands of human languages use patterns of sound or gesture for symbols which enable communication with others around them .
Languages tend to share certain properties , although there are exceptions .
Constructed languages such as Esperanto , programming languages , and various mathematical formalism is not necessarily restricted to the properties shared by human languages .
Communication is not a tool used only by humans , plants and animals , but it is also used by microorganisms like bacteria .
The process is called quorum sensing .
Through quorum sensing , bacteria are able to sense the density of cells , and regulate gene expression accordingly .
This can be seen in both gram positive and gram negative bacteria .
Traditional chemistry starts with the study of elementary particles , atoms , molecules , substances , metals , crystals and other aggregates of matter .
This matter can be studied in solid , liquid , or gas states , in isolation or in combination .
The interactions , reactions and transformations that are studied in chemistry are usually the result of interactions between atoms , leading to rearrangements of the chemical bonds which hold atoms together .
Such behaviors are studied in a chemistry laboratory .
However , this definition only works well for substances that are composed of molecules , which is not true of many substances -LRB- see below -RRB- .
Molecules are typically a set of atoms bound together by covalent bonds , such that the structure is electrically neutral and all valence electrons are paired with other electrons either in bonds or in lone pairs .
A collection of substances is called a mixture .
In addition to the specific chemical properties that distinguish different chemical classifications , chemicals can exist in several phases .
An ion is a charged species , an atom or a molecule , that has lost or gained one or more electrons .
When an atom loses an electron and thus has more protons than electrons , the atom is a positively charged ion or cation .
When an atom gains an electron and thus has more electrons than protons , the atom is a negatively charged ion or anion .
Cations and anions can form a crystalline lattice of neutral salts , such as the Na + and Cl − ions forming sodium chloride , or NaCl .
Examples of polyatomic ions that do not split up during acid-base reactions are hydroxide -LRB- OH − -RRB- and phosphate -LRB- PO43 − -RRB- .
The development of the modern scientific method was slow and arduous , but an early scientific method for chemistry began emerging among early Muslim chemists , beginning with the 9th century Persian or Arabian chemist Jābir ibn Hayyān -LRB- known as `` Geber '' in Europe -RRB- , who is sometimes referred to as `` the father of chemistry '' .
He introduced a systematic and experimental approach to scientific research based in the laboratory , in contrast to the ancient Greek and Egyptian alchemists whose works were largely allegorical and often unintelligble .
Under the influence of the new empirical methods propounded by Sir Francis Bacon and others , a group of chemists at Oxford , Robert Boyle , Robert Hooke and John Mayow began to reshape the old alchemical traditions into a scientific discipline .
Boyle in particular is regarded as the founding father of chemistry due to his most important work , the classic chemistry text The Sceptical Chymist where the differentiation is made between the claims of alchemy and the empirical scientific discoveries of the new chemistry .
Viruses may reach the lung by a number of different routes .
Respiratory syncytial virus is typically contracted when people touch contaminated objects and then they touch their eyes or nose .
Other viral infections occur when contaminated airborne droplets are inhaled through the mouth or nose .
Once in the upper airway , the viruses may make their way in the lungs , where they invade the cells lining the airways , alveoli , or lung parenchyma .
Some viruses such as measles and herpes simplex may reach the lungs via the blood .
The invasion of the lungs may lead to varying degrees of cell death .
When the immune system responds to the infection , even more lung damage may occur .
Primarily white blood cells , mainly mononuclear cells , generate the inflammation .
As well as damaging the lungs , many viruses simultaneously affect other organs and thus disrupt other body functions .
Viruses also make the body more susceptible to bacterial infections ; in this way , bacterial pneumonia can arise as a co-morbid condition .
For those who require hospitalization and caught their pneumonia in the community the use of a β-lactam such as cephazolin plus macrolide such as azithromycin or a fluoroquinolones is recommended .
The addition of corticosteroids also appears to improve outcomes .
In general , aspiration pneumonitis is treated conservatively with antibiotics indicated only for aspiration pneumonia .
The choice of antibiotic will depend on several factors , including the suspected causative organism and whether pneumonia was acquired in the community or developed in a hospital setting .
Common options include clindamycin , a combination of a beta-lactam antibiotic and metronidazole , or an aminoglycoside .
Corticosteroids are sometimes used in aspiration pneumonia , but there is limited evidence to support their effectiveness .
The arithmetic logic unit -LRB- ALU -RRB- is a digital circuit within the processor that performs integer arithmetic and bitwise logic operations .
The inputs to the ALU are the data words to be operated on -LRB- called operands -RRB- , status information from previous operations , and a code from the control unit indicating which operation to perform .
Most CPUs are synchronous circuits , which means they employ a clock signal to pace their sequential operations .
The clock signal is produced by an external oscillator circuit that generates a consistent number of pulses each second in the form of a periodic square wave .
The frequency of the clock pulses determines the rate at which a CPU executes instructions and , consequently , the faster the clock , the more instructions the CPU will execute each second .
In 1729 , Linnaeus wrote a thesis , Praeludia Sponsaliorum Plantarum on plant sexual reproduction .
This attracted the attention of Rudbeck ; in May 1730 , he selected Linnaeus to give lectures at the University although the young man was only a second-year student .
His lectures were popular , and Linnaeus often addressed an audience of 300 people .
In June , Linnaeus moved from Celsius ' house to Rudbeck 's to become the tutor of the three youngest of his 24 children .
Over that winter , Linnaeus began to doubt Tournefort 's system of classification and decided to create one of his own .
His plan was to divide the plants by the number of stamens and pistils .
He began writing several books , which would later result in , for example , Genera Plantarum and Critica Botanica .
He also produced a book on the plants grown in the Uppsala Botanical Garden , Adonis Uplandicus .
In April 1735 , Linnaeus and Sohlberg set out for the Netherlands , with Linnaeus to take a doctoral degree in medicine at the University of Harderwijk .
Linnaeus quickly discovered it was a fake : jaws and clawed feet from weasels and skins from snakes had been glued together .
The provenance of the hydra suggested to Linnaeus it had been manufactured by monks to represent the Beast of Revelation .
As much as this may have upset the mayor , Linnaeus made his observations public and the mayor 's dreams of selling the hydra for an enormous sum were ruined .
Fearing his wrath , Linnaeus and Sohlberg had to leave Hamburg quickly .
His work at Hartekamp led to another book , Hortus Cliffortianus , a catalogue of the botanical holdings in the herbarium and botanical garden of Hartekamp .
He wrote it in nine months -LRB- completed in July 1737 -RRB- , but it was not published until 1738 .
It contains the first use of the name Nepenthes , which Linnaeus used to describe a genus of pitcher plants .
In the summer of 1746 , Linnaeus was once again commissioned by the Government to carry out an expedition , this time to the Swedish province of Västergötland .
He set out from Uppsala on 12 June and returned on 11 August .
Linnaeus described his findings from the expedition in the book Wästgöta-Resa , published the next year .
After returning from the journey the Government decided Linnaeus should take on another expedition to the southernmost province Scania .
This journey was postponed , as Linnaeus felt too busy .
In 1750 , Linnaeus became rector of Uppsala University , starting a period where natural sciences were esteemed .
Perhaps the most important contribution he made during his time at Uppsala was to teach ; many of his students travelled to various places in the world to collect botanical samples .
His lectures were normally very popular and were often held in the Botanical Garden .
He tried to teach the students to think for themselves and not trust anybody , not even him .
Even more popular than the lectures were the botanical excursions made every Saturday during summer , where Linnaeus and his students explored the flora and fauna in the vicinity of Uppsala .
Linnaeus published Philosophia Botanica in 1751 .
The book contained a complete survey of the taxonomy system he had been using in his earlier works .
Genera plantarum : eorumque characteres naturales secundum numerum , figuram , situm , et proportionem omnium fructificationis partium was first published in 1737 , delineating plant genera .
Around 10 editions were published , not all of them by Linnaeus himself ; the most important is the 1754 fifth edition .
In it Linnaeus divided the plant Kingdom into 24 classes .
One , Cryptogamia , included all the plants with concealed reproductive parts -LRB- algae , fungi , mosses and liverworts and ferns -RRB- .
Much material which had been intensively studied by Linné in his scientific career belonged to the collection of Queen Lovisa Ulrika -LRB- 1720 -- 1782 -RRB- -LRB- in the Linnean publications referred to as `` Museum Ludovicae Ulricae '' or `` M. L. U. '' -RRB- .
This collection was donated by his grandson King Gustav IV Adolf -LRB- 1778 -- 1837 -RRB- to the museum in Uppsala in 1804 .
, the wet parts -LRB- alcohol collection -RRB- of which were later donated to the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences , and is today housed in the Swedish Museum of Natural History at Stockholm .
The dry material was transferred to Uppsala .
The Edicts of Ashoka established constitutional principles for the 3rd century BC Maurya king 's rule in Ancient India .
For constitutional principles almost lost to antiquity , see the code of Manu .
Many of the Germanic people that filled the power vacuum left by the Western Roman Empire in the Early Middle Ages codified their laws .
This was followed by the Lex Burgundionum , applying separate codes for Germans and for Romans ; the Pactus Alamannorum ; and the Salic Law of the Franks , all written soon after 500 .
In 506 , the Breviarum or `` Lex Romana '' of Alaric II , king of the Visigoths , adopted and consolidated the Codex Theodosianus together with assorted earlier Roman laws .
Systems that appeared somewhat later include the Edictum Rothari of the Lombards -LRB- 643 -RRB- , the Lex Visigothorum -LRB- 654 -RRB- , the Lex Alamannorum -LRB- 730 -RRB- and the Lex Frisionum -LRB- ca 785 -RRB- .
These continental codes were all composed in Latin , while Anglo-Saxon was used for those of England , beginning with the Code of Æthelberht of Kent -LRB- 602 -RRB- .
In ca. 893 , Alfred the Great combined this and two other earlier Saxon codes , with various Mosaic and Christian precepts , to produce the Doom book code of laws for England .
In England , Henry I 's proclamation of the Charter of Liberties in 1100 bound the king for the first time in his treatment of the clergy and the nobility .
This idea was extended and refined by the English barony when they forced King John to sign Magna Carta in 1215 .
The most important single article of the Magna Carta , related to `` habeas corpus '' , provided that the king was not permitted to imprison , outlaw , exile or kill anyone at a whim -- there must be due process of law first .
Stefan Dušan , Emperor of Serbs and Greeks , enacted Dušan 's Code -LRB- Serbian : Душанов Законик / Dušanov Zakonik -RRB- in Serbia , in two state congresses : in 1349 in Skopje and in 1354 in Serres .
The Code was based on Roman-Byzantine law .
The legal transplanting is notable with the articles 171 and 172 of Dušan 's Code , which regulated the juridical independence .
Around 1240 , the Coptic Egyptian Christian writer , ` Abul Fada'il Ibn al - ` Assal , wrote the Fetha Negest in Arabic .
There are a few historical records claiming that this law code was translated into Ge'ez and entered Ethiopia around 1450 in the reign of Zara Yaqob .
Even so , its first recorded use in the function of a constitution -LRB- supreme law of the land -RRB- is with Sarsa Dengel beginning in 1563 .
The Fetha Negest remained the supreme law in Ethiopia until 1931 , when a modern-style Constitution was first granted by Emperor Haile Selassie I.
The Serbian revolution initially led to a proclamation of a proto-constitution in 1811 ; the full-fledged Constitution of Serbia followed few decades later , in 1835 .
The first Serbian constitution -LRB- Sretenjski ustav -RRB- was adopted at the national assembly in Kragujevac on February 15 , 1835 .
Pushkin was born into Russian nobility in Moscow .
His matrilineal great-grandfather was Abram Petrovich Gannibal , who was kidnapped from Eritrea and raised in the household of Peter the Great .
Pushkin published his first poem at the age of fifteen , and was widely recognized by the literary establishment by the time of his graduation from the Tsarskoye Selo Lyceum .
Born in Moscow , Pushkin published his first poem at the age of fifteen .
By the time he finished school as part of the first graduating class of the prestigious Imperial Lyceum in Tsarskoye Selo near Saint Petersburg , his talent was already widely recognized within the Russian literary scene .
After school , Pushkin plunged into the vibrant and raucous intellectual youth culture of the capital , Saint Petersburg .
Hegelian dialectic , usually presented in a threefold manner , was stated by Heinrich Moritz Chalybäus as comprising three dialectical stages of development : a thesis , giving rise to its reaction , an antithesis , which contradicts or negates the thesis , and the tension between the two being resolved by means of a synthesis .
Although this model is often named after Hegel , he himself never used that specific formulation .
Hegel ascribed that terminology to Kant .
Carrying on Kant 's work , Fichte greatly elaborated on the synthesis model , and popularized it .
Neo-orthodoxy , in Europe also known as theology of crisis and dialectical theology , is an approach to theology in Protestantism that was developed in the aftermath of the First World War -LRB- 1914 -- 1918 -RRB- .
It is primarily associated with two Swiss professors and pastors , Karl Barth -LRB- 1886 -- 1968 -RRB- and Emil Brunner -LRB- 1899 -- 1966 -RRB- , even though Barth himself expressed his unease in the use of the term .
It can conceive of these syntheses only within a moving , dialectical totalisation , which is nothing else but history or -- from the strictly cultural point of view adopted here -- ` philosophy-becoming-the world ' . ''
Web applications , which usually run on the web server and output dynamically generated web pages to web browsers , using e.g. PHP , Java , ASP.NET , or even JavaScript that runs on the server .
In modern times these commonly include some JavaScript to be run in the web browser as well , in which case they typically run partly on the server , partly in the web browser .
freeware , which includes the category of `` free trial '' software or `` freemium '' software -LRB- in the past , the term shareware was often used for free trial/freemium software -RRB- .
As the name suggests , freeware can be used for free , although in the case of free trials or freemium software , this is sometimes only true for a limited period of time or with limited functionality .
An outline -LRB- algorithm -RRB- for what would have been the first piece of software was written by Ada Lovelace in the 19th century , for the planned Analytical Engine .
Operating systems , which are essential collections of software that manage resources and provides common services for other software that runs `` on top '' of them .
In practice , an operating system comes bundled with additional software -LRB- including application software -RRB- so that a user can potentially do some work with a computer that only has an operating system .
Device drivers , which operate or control a particular type of device that is attached to a computer .
Each device needs at least one corresponding device driver ; because a computer typically has at minimum at least one input device and at least one output device , a computer typically needs more than one device driver .
The Aztec empire reached its height during the reign of Ahuitzotl in 1486 -- 1502 .
His successor , Motehcuzōma Xocoyotzin -LRB- better known as Moctezuma II , Moctezuma , or Montezuma -RRB- , had been Hueyi Tlatoani for 17 years when the Spanish , led by Hernándo Cortés , landed on the Gulf Coast in the spring of 1519 .
Despite some early battles between the two , Cortés allied himself with the long-time enemy of the Aztecs , the Confederacy of Tlaxcala , and arrived at the gates of Tenochtitlan on November 8 , 1519 .
Huitzilopochtli attained this central position after the founding of Tenochtitlan and the formation of the Mexica city-state society in the 14th century .
Prior to this , Huitzilopochtli was associated primarily with hunting , presumably one of the important subsistence activities of the itinerant bands that would eventually become the Mexica .
There were also dramatic presentations that included players , musicians and acrobats .
`` Poetry '' was in xochitl in cuicatl a dual term meaning `` the flower and the song '' and was divided into different genres .
Yaocuicatl was devoted to war and the god -LRB- s -RRB- of war , Teocuicatl to the gods and creation myths and to adoration of said figures , xochicuicatl to flowers -LRB- a symbol of poetry itself and indicative of the highly metaphorical nature of a poetry that often utilized duality to convey multiple layers of meaning -RRB- .
Aztecs admired Mixtec craftsmanship so much that they imported artisans to Tenochtitlan and requested work to be done in certain Mixtec styles .
The Aztecs also admired the Mixtec codices , so some of them were made to order by Mixteca for the Aztecs .
In the later days , high society Aztec women started to wear Mixtec clothing , specifically the quexquemetl .
It was worn over their traditional huipil , and much coveted by the women who could not afford such imported goods .
The Nahuatl language is today spoken by 1.5 million people , mostly in mountainous areas in the states of central Mexico .
Local dialects of Spanish , Mexican Spanish generally , and the Spanish language worldwide have all been influenced , in varying degrees , by Nahuatl .
Some Nahuatl words -LRB- most notably chocolate , derived from the Nahuatl word xocolatl , and tomato -RRB- have been borrowed through Spanish into other languages around the world .
Bernal Díaz del Castillo accompanied Cortes , and he later wrote a book named : The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico .
In his book , Capitan Bernal Díaz del Castillo provides his account of the Conquest of Mexico , in which he describes the events leading up to the conquest of Mexico , including accounts of the human sacrifices and cannibalism that he witnessed first hand .
However , Bernal Díaz wrote several decades after the fact , never learned the native languages , and did not take notes .
His account is colorful , but his work is considered by historians to be erratic and exaggerated .
The Nahua peoples began to migrate into Mesoamerica from northern Mexico in the 6th century .
They populated central Mexico , dislocating speakers of Oto-Manguean languages as they spread their political influence south .
As the former nomadic hunter-gatherer peoples mixed with the complex civilizations of Mesoamerica , adopting religious and cultural practices , the foundation for later Aztec culture was laid .
In the 12th century the Nahua power center was in Azcapotzalco , from where the Tepanecs dominated the valley of Mexico .
Around this time the Mexica tribe arrived in central Mexico .
By the ninth century AD , a string of dynastic states , including the earliest Hausa states , stretched across the sub-Saharan savannah from the western regions to central Sudan .
Ghana declined in the eleventh century , but was succeeded by the Mali Empire which consolidated much of western Sudan in the thirteenth century .
Kanem accepted Islam in the eleventh century .
Following the breakup of Mali , a local leader named Sonni Ali -LRB- 1464 -- 1492 -RRB- founded the Songhai Empire in the region of middle Niger and the western Sudan and took control of the trans-Saharan trade .
Sonni Ali seized Timbuktu in 1468 and Jenne in 1473 , building his regime on trade revenues and the cooperation of Muslim merchants .
His successor Askia Mohammad I -LRB- 1493 -- 1528 -RRB- made Islam the official religion , built mosques , and brought to Gao Muslim scholars , including al-Maghili -LRB- d. 1504 -RRB- , the founder of an important tradition of Sudanic African Muslim scholarship .
By the eleventh century , some Hausa states -- such as Kano , jigawa , Katsina , and Gobir -- had developed into walled towns engaging in trade , servicing caravans , and the manufacture of goods .
Action was also taken against African leaders who refused to agree to British treaties to outlaw the trade , for example against `` the usurping King of Lagos '' , deposed in 1851 .
Anti-slavery treaties were signed with over 50 African rulers .
The largest powers of West Africa -LRB- the Asante Confederacy , the Kingdom of Dahomey , and the Oyo Empire -RRB- adopted different ways of adapting to the shift .
Asante and Dahomey concentrated on the development of `` legitimate commerce '' in the form of palm oil , cocoa , timber and gold , forming the bedrock of West Africa 's modern export trade .
The Oyo Empire , unable to adapt , collapsed into civil wars .
There are clear signs of increased networking among African organizations and states .
For example , in the civil war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo -LRB- former Zaire -RRB- , rather than rich , non-African countries intervening , neighbouring African countries became involved -LRB- see also Second Congo War -RRB- .
Since the conflict began in 1998 , the estimated death toll has reached 5 million .
Political associations such as the African Union offer hope for greater co-operation and peace between the continent 's many countries .
Extensive human rights abuses still occur in several parts of Africa , often under the oversight of the state .
Most of such violations occur for political reasons , often as a side effect of civil war .
Countries where major human rights violations have been reported in recent times include the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Sierra Leone , Liberia , Sudan , Zimbabwe , and Côte d'Ivoire .
Kǎishū style -LRB- traditional regular script -RRB- -- still in use today -- and attributed to Wang Xizhi -LRB- 王羲之 , 303 -- 361 -RRB- and his followers , is even more regularized .
Its spread was encouraged by Emperor Mingzong of Later Tang -LRB- 926 -- 933 -RRB- , who ordered the printing of the classics using new wooden blocks in Kaishu .
Printing technologies here allowed a shape stabilization .
But small changes have been made , for example in the shape of 广 which is not absolutely the same in the Kangxi Dictionary of 1716 as in modern books .
Traditional East Asian writing uses the Four Treasures of the Study -LRB- 文房四寶 / 文房四宝 -RRB- : the ink brushes known as máobǐ -LRB- 毛笔 -RRB- to write Chinese characters , Chinese ink , paper , and inkstone , known as the Four Friends of the Study -LRB- Korean : 문방사우 -RRB- in Korea .
The Nasta ` liq style is the most popular contemporary style among classical Persian calligraphy scripts ; Persian calligraphers call it the `` bride of calligraphy scripts '' .
This calligraphy style has been based on such a strong structure that it has changed very little since .
Mir Ali Tabrizi had found the optimum composition of the letters and graphical rules so it has just been fine-tuned during the past seven centuries .
However , a seven pitch segment of C5 -LRB- the cycle of fifths , which are enharmonic with the cycle of fourths -RRB- will produce the diatonic major scale .
Cyclic tonal progressions in the works of Romantic composers such as Gustav Mahler and Richard Wagner form a link with the cyclic pitch successions in the atonal music of Modernists such as Bartók , Alexander Scriabin , Edgard Varèse , and the Vienna school .
At the same time , these progressions signal the end of tonality .
A calendar is a system of organizing days for social , religious , commercial or administrative purposes .
This is done by giving names to periods of time , typically days , weeks , months , and years .
A calendar can also mean a list of planned events , such as a court calendar or a partly or fully chronological list of documents , such as a calendar of wills .
Cultures may define other units of time , such as the week , for the purpose of scheduling regular activities that do not easily coincide with months or years .
Many cultures use different baselines for their calendars ' starting years .
For example , the year in Japan is based on the reign of the current emperor : 2006 was Year 18 of the Emperor Akihito .
Periods in a calendar -LRB- such as years and months -RRB- are usually , though not necessarily , synchronized with the cycle of the sun or the moon .
The most common type of pre-modern calendar was the lunisolar calendar , a lunar calendar that occasionally adds one intercalary month to remain synchronised with the solar year over the long term .
A fiscal calendar generally means the accounting year of a government or a business .
It is a set of 12 months that may start at any date in a year .
The US government 's fiscal year starts on 1 October and ends on 30 September .
Small traditional businesses in India start the fiscal year on Diwali festival and end the day before the next year 's Diwali festival .
Such methods allow solving for the model-relevant `` structural coefficients '' , the estimated algebraic counterparts of the theory .
The first big strike-wave in the Ruhr occurred in early 1947 -- it was about food rations and housing , but soon there were demands for nationalisation .
The United States appointed military governor -LRB- Newman -RRB- however stated at the time that he had the power to break strikes by withholding food rations .
As the military controls in Western Germany were nearly all relinquished and the Germans were allowed to rebuild their own economy with Marshal Plan aid things rapidly improved .
By 1951 , German industrial production had overtaken the prewar level .
The Marshall Aid funds were important , but , after the currency reform -LRB- which permitted German capitalists to revalue their assets -RRB- and the establishment of a new political system , much more important was the commitment of the United States to rebuilding German capitalism and establishing a free market economy and government , rather than keeping Germany in a weak position .
Initially , average real wages remained low , lower even than in 1938 , until the early 1950s , while profitability was unusually high .
So the total investment fund , aided by credits , was also high , resulting in a high rate of capital accumulation which was nearly all reinvested in new construction or new tools .
This was called the German economic miracle or `` Wirtschaftswunder '' .
Friedrich Engels , in Socialism : Utopian and Scientific , argued that state-owned enterprises would characterize the final stage of capitalism , consisting of ownership and management of large-scale production and communication by the bourgeois state .
In his writings , Vladimir Lenin characterized the economy of Soviet Russia as state capitalist , believing state capitalism to be an early step toward the development of socialism .
Peter A. Hall and David Soskice argued that modern economies have developed two different forms of capitalism : liberal market economies -LRB- or LME -RRB- -LRB- e.g. US , UK , Canada , New Zealand , Ireland -RRB- and coordinated market economies -LRB- CME -RRB- -LRB- e.g. Germany , Japan , Sweden , Austria -RRB- .
Those two types can be distinguished by the primary way in which firms coordinate with each other and other actors , such as trade unions .
If the market does not provide consistent job opportunities -LRB- as it has in previous decades -RRB- , the shortcomings of liberal social security systems may depress social and political participation even further than in other capitalist economies .
In LMEs firms primarily coordinate their endeavors by way of hierarchies and market mechanisms .
Coordinated market economies more heavily rely on non-market forms of interaction in the coordination of their relationship with other actors -LRB- for a detailed description see Varieties of Capitalism -RRB- .
These two forms of capitalisms developed different industrial relations , vocational training and education , corporate governance , inter-firm relations , and relations with employees .
Since the early 2000s the number of labor market outsiders has rapidly grown in Europe , especially among the youth , potentially influencing social and political participation .
Using varieties of capitalism theory it is possible to disentangle the different effects on social and political participation that an increase of labor market outsiders has in liberal and coordinated market economies -LRB- Ferragina et al. 2016 -RRB- .
This signals an important problem for liberal market economies in a period of crisis .
Civil -LRB- legal -RRB- status : the worker could for example be a free citizen , an indentured labourer , the subject of forced labour -LRB- including some prison or army labour -RRB- ; a worker could be assigned by the political authorities to a task , they could be a semi-slave or a serf bound to the land who is hired out part of the time .
So the labour might be performed on a more or less voluntary basis , or on a more or less involuntary basis , in which there are many gradations .
This is true because each point on the supply curve is the answer to the question `` If this firm is faced with this potential price , how much output will it be able to and willing to sell ? ''
If a firm has market power , its decision of how much output to provide to the market influences the market price , therefore the firm is not `` faced with '' any price , and the question becomes less relevant .
Economists also distinguish the short-run market supply curve from the long-run market supply curve .
In this context , two things are assumed constant by definition of the short run : the availability of one or more fixed inputs -LRB- typically physical capital -RRB- , and the number of firms in the industry .
In the long-run , firms can adjust their holdings of physical capital , enabling them to better adjust their quantity supplied at any given price .
Furthermore , in the long-run potential competitors can enter or exit the industry in response to market conditions .
The campaign for the independence of New Granada was consolidated with the victory at the Battle of Boyacá on 7 August 1819 .
Bolivar returned to Angostura , where congress passed a law forming the Republic of Greater Colombia on 17 December , making Bolivar president and Zea vice president , with Francisco de Paula Santander vice president on the New Granada side , and Juan Germán Roscio vice president on the Venezuela side .
Sorghum is efficient in converting solar energy to chemical energy , and also uses less water compared to other grain crops .
Biofuel , using sweet sorghum as a high sugar content from its stalk for ethanol production , is being developed with biomass which can be turned into charcoal , syngas , and bio-oil .
Sinan masterfully combined art with functionalism in the bridges he built .
Buildings were repetitions of former types and were based on rudimentary plans .
An architect could sketch a plan for a new building and an assistant or foreman knew what to do , because novel ideas were avoided .
Moreover , architects used an extravagant margin of safety in their designs , resulting in a wasteful use of material and labour .
Sinan would gradually change all this .
The son of a stonemason , he received a technical education and became a military engineer .
Mihrimah Sultana , the only daughter of Süleyman and wife of the Grand Vizier Rüstem Pasha gave Sinan the commission to build a mosque with medrese -LRB- college -RRB- , an imaret -LRB- soup kitchen -RRB- and a sibyan mekteb -LRB- Qur ` an school -RRB- in Üsküdar .
This Iskele Mosque -LRB- or Jetty mosque -RRB- already shows several hallmarks of Sinan 's mature style : a spacious , high-vaulted basement , slender minarets , single-domed baldacchino , flanked by three semi-domes ending in three exedrae and a broad double portico .
The construction of a double portico was not a first in Ottoman architecture , but it set a trend for country mosques and mosques of viziers in particular .
In 1561 , when Rüstem Pasha died , Sinan began the construction of the Rüstem Pasha Mosque , as a memorial supervised by his widow Mihrimah Sultana .
At each corner of this square stands a gigantic pier , connected with immense arches each with 15 large windows and four circular ones , flooding the interior with light .
This time the central form is octagonal , modelled on the monastery church of Saints Sergius and Bacchus , with four small semi-domes set in the corners .
In the same year , Sinan built a türbe for Rüstem Pasha in the garden of the Şehzade Mosque , decorated with the finest tiles Iznik could produce .
Mihrimah Sultana , having doubled her wealth after the death of her husband , now wanted a mosque of her own .
Sinan built the Mihrimah Camii at Edirnekapı -LRB- Edirne Gate -RRB- for her on the highest of the seven hills of Constantinople .
Sinan , concerned with grandeur , built a mosque in one of his most imaginative designs , using new support systems and lateral spaces to increase the area available for windows .
He built a central dome 37 m -LRB- 121 ft -RRB- high and 20 m -LRB- 66 ft -RRB- wide , supported by pendentives , on a square base with two lateral galleries , each with three cupolas .
In the vernacular , both are referred to as ` canals ' , and in most cases , the engineered works will have a series of dams and locks that create areas of low speed current flow .
These areas are referred to as ` slack water levels ' , often just called ` levels ' .
When a section of the canal needs to be sealed off so it can be drained for maintenance stop planks are frequently used .
These consist of planks of wood placed across the canal to form a dam .
On more modern canals , `` guard locks '' or gates were sometimes placed to allow a section of the canal to be quickly closed off , either for maintenance , or to prevent a major loss of water due to a canal breach .
A mule can carry an eighth-ton -LSB- 250 pounds -LRB- 113 kg -RRB- -RSB- maximum load over a journey measured in days and weeks , though much more for shorter distances and periods with appropriate rest .
Besides , carts need roads .
The canal boats could carry thirty tons at a time with only one horse pulling - more than ten times the amount of cargo per horse that was possible with a cart .
Because of this huge increase in supply , the Bridgewater canal reduced the price of coal in Manchester by nearly two-thirds within just a year of its opening .
The Bridgewater was also a huge financial success , with it earning what had been spent on its construction within just a few years .
The empowering model -LRB- also , customer model -RRB- allows for the person with a disability and his/her family to decide the course of his/her treatment .
This turns the professional into a service provider whose role is to offer guidance and carry out the client 's decisions .
This model `` empowers '' the individual to pursue his/her own goals .
Disability activism that demands a wide variety of grievances be addressed , such as lack of accessibility , poor representation in media , general disrespect , and lack of recognition , can be said to originate from a social model framework .
Furthermore , embracing disability as a positive identity by becoming involved in disability communities and participating in disability cultures can be an effective way to combat internalized oppression and challenge dominant narratives about disability .
The federal government enacted The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 , which was created to allow equal opportunity for jobs , access to private and government funded facilities , and transportation for people with disabilities .
This act was created with the purpose to ensure that employers would not discriminate against any individual despite their disability .
In 1990 , data was gathered to show the percentage of people with disabilities who worked in the U.S. Out of the 13 % who filled out the survey , only 53 % percent of individuals with disabilities worked while 90 % of this group population did not , the government wanted to change this , they wanted Americans with disabilities to have the same opportunities as those who did not have a disability .
The ADA not only required corporations to hire disabled people but that they also accommodate them and their needs .
Furthermore , most scholars accepted Ptolemy 's estimate that Eurasia spanned 180 ° longitude , rather than the actual 130 ° -LRB- to the Chinese mainland -RRB- or 150 ° -LRB- to Japan at the latitude of Spain -RRB- .
Columbus , for his part , believed the even higher estimate of Marinus of Tyre , which put the longitudinal span of the Eurasian landmass at 225 ° , leaving only 135 ° of water .
He also believed that Japan -LRB- which he called `` Cipangu '' , following Marco Polo -RRB- was much larger , farther to the east from China -LRB- `` Cathay '' -RRB- , and closer to the equator than it is , and that there were inhabited islands even farther to the east than Japan , including the mythical Antillia , which he thought might lie not much farther to the west than the Azores .
In this , he was influenced by the ideas of Florentine astronomer Toscanelli , who corresponded with Columbus before his death in 1482 and who also defended the feasibility of a westward route to Asia .
Columbus therefore estimated the distance from the Canary Islands to Japan to be about 3,000 Italian miles -LRB- 3,700 km , or 2,300 statute miles -RRB- .
The true figure is now known to be vastly larger : about 20,000 km .
No ship in the 15th century could have carried enough food and fresh water for such a long voyage , and the dangers involved in navigating through the uncharted ocean would have been formidable .
Most European navigators reasonably concluded that a westward voyage from Europe to Asia was unfeasible .
The Catholic Monarchs , however , having completed an expensive war in the Iberian Peninsula , were eager to obtain a competitive edge over other European countries in the quest for trade with the Indies .
Columbus 's project , though far-fetched , held the promise of such an advantage .
Columbus called the island -LRB- in what is now The Bahamas -RRB- San Salvador ; the natives called it Guanahani .
Based on primary accounts and on what one would expect from the geographic positions of the islands given Columbus 's course , the prime candidates are San Salvador Island -LRB- so named in 1925 on the theory that it was Columbus 's San Salvador -RRB- , Samana Cay , and Plana Cays .
Columbus then sailed more than 100 kilometres -LRB- 62 miles -RRB- eastwards along the northern coast of Hispaniola , establishing a new settlement , which he called La Isabela , in the present-day Dominican Republic .
However , La Isabela proved to be poorly located and the settlement was short-lived .
The anniversary of Columbus 's 1492 landing in the Americas is usually observed on 12 October in Spain and throughout the Americas , except Canada .
In Spain it is called the Fiesta Nacional de España y Día de la Hispanidad , while a number of countries in Latin America celebrate it as Día de la Raza .
In the United States it is called Columbus Day and is observed annually on the second Monday in October .
Cyrillic fonts , as well as Latin ones , have roman and italic types -LRB- practically all popular modern fonts include parallel sets of Latin and Cyrillic letters , where many glyphs , uppercase as well as lowercase , are simply shared by both -RRB- .
However , the native font terminology in most Slavic languages -LRB- for example , in Russian -RRB- does not use the words `` roman '' and `` italic '' in this sense .
Instead , the nomenclature follows German naming patterns :
Cyrillic is derived from the Greek uncial script , augmented by letters from the older Glagolitic alphabet , including some ligatures .
These additional letters were used for Old Church Slavonic sounds not found in Greek .
The script is named in honor of the two Byzantine brothers , Saints Cyril and Methodius , who created the Glagolitic alphabet earlier on .
Modern scholars believe that Cyrillic was developed and formalized by early disciples of Cyril and Methodius .
Upright Cyrillic lowercase letters are essentially small capitals -LRB- with exceptions : Cyrillic ⟨ а ⟩ , ⟨ е ⟩ , ⟨ і ⟩ , ⟨ ј ⟩ , ⟨ р ⟩ , and ⟨ у ⟩ adopted Western lowercase shapes , lowercase ⟨ ф ⟩ is typically designed under the influence of Latin ⟨ p ⟩ , lowercase ⟨ б ⟩ , ⟨ ђ ⟩ and ⟨ ћ ⟩ are traditional handwritten forms -RRB- , although a good-quality Cyrillic typeface will still include separate small-caps glyphs .
This has been attributed to the fact that people often lose weight as they become progressively more ill .
In people with greater degrees of obesity , however , the risk of further cardiovascular events is increased .
Even after cardiac bypass surgery , no increase in mortality is seen in the overweight and obese .
One study found that the improved survival could be explained by the more aggressive treatment obese people receive after a cardiac event .
Another found that if one takes into account chronic obstructive pulmonary disease -LRB- COPD -RRB- in those with PAD , the benefit of obesity no longer exists .
The correlation between social class and BMI varies globally .
A review in 1989 found that in developed countries women of a high social class were less likely to be obese .
No significant differences were seen among men of different social classes .
An update of this review carried out in 2007 found the same relationships , but they were weaker .
The decrease in strength of correlation was felt to be due to the effects of globalization .
Among developed countries , levels of adult obesity , and percentage of teenage children who are overweight , are correlated with income inequality .
A similar relationship is seen among US states : more adults , even in higher social classes , are obese in more unequal states .
In the developing world urbanization is playing a role in increasing rate of obesity .
Obesity is a leading preventable cause of death worldwide , with increasing rates in adults and children .
Authorities view it as one of the most serious public health problems of the 21st century .
Obesity is stigmatized in much of the modern world -LRB- particularly in the Western world -RRB- , though it was seen as a symbol of wealth and fertility at other times in history and still is in some parts of the world .
In 2013 , the American Medical Association classified obesity as a disease .
The World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- predicts that overweight and obesity may soon replace more traditional public health concerns such as undernutrition and infectious diseases as the most significant cause of poor health .
The United States Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening for all adults followed by behavioral interventions in those who are obese .
Public health efforts seek to understand and correct the environmental factors responsible for the increasing prevalence of obesity in the population .
Solutions look at changing the factors that cause excess food energy consumption and inhibit physical activity .
Efforts include federally reimbursed meal programs in schools , limiting direct junk food marketing to children , and decreasing access to sugar-sweetened beverages in schools .
The World Health Organization recommends the taxing of sugary drinks .
When constructing urban environments , efforts have been made to increase access to parks and to develop pedestrian routes .
The main treatment for obesity consists of dieting and physical exercise .
Diet programs may produce weight loss over the short term , but maintaining this weight loss is frequently difficult and often requires making exercise and a lower food energy diet a permanent part of a person 's lifestyle .
With the American Medical Association 's 2013 classification of obesity as a chronic disease , it is thought that health insurance companies will more likely pay for obesity treatment , counseling and surgery , and the cost of research and development of fat treatment pills or gene therapy treatments should be more affordable if insurers help to subsidize their cost .
The AMA classification is not legally binding , however , so health insurers still have the right to reject coverage for a treatment or procedure .
A number of organizations exist that promote the acceptance of obesity .
The US-based National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance -LRB- NAAFA -RRB- was formed in 1969 and describes itself as a civil rights organization dedicated to ending size discrimination .
Hatirjheel-Begunbari , which was once a slum area , has turned into a new place of recreation for city dwellers .
Hatirjheel covering 320 acres -LRB- 129 ha -RRB- is transformed into a place of festivity at night but with serenity settling down .
However , the parks and the recreation places are often crowded and lacks security and cleanliness aspects , which is yet one of the big issues .
The city 's diverse economy registered a gross municipal GDP of US$ 85 billion -LRB- PPP -RRB- in 2008 .
Administrative and security services are also concentrated in the city , due to numerous institutions of the Government of Bangladesh .
The Greater Dhaka industrial area is a major manufacturing hub , bounded by the Buriganga , Meghna , Dhaleshwari and Turag Rivers .
Exports from the garments sector in Dhaka amounted to over 19 billion US dollars in 2013 .
To fight rising traffic congestion and population , the national government has recently implemented a policy for rapid urbanisation of surrounding areas and beyond by the introduction of a ten-year relief on income tax for new construction of facilities and buildings outside Dhaka .
The city has historically attracted numerous migrant workers .
The city has a growing middle class , driving the market for modern consumer and luxury goods .
Restaurants , shopping malls and luxury hotels continue to serve as vital elements in the city 's economy .
Hawkers , peddlers , small shops , rickshaw transport , roadside vendors and stalls employ a large segment of the population -- rickshaw-drivers alone number as many as 400,000 .
Half the workforce is employed in household and unorganised labour , while about 800,000 work in the textile industry .
The city has a per-capita income of US$ 3,100 -LRB- the lowest among the world 's megacities -RRB- ; and an estimated 34 % of households live below the poverty line .
Dhaka faces tremendous challenges of congestion and inadequate infrastructure .
Modern Dhaka developed from the late 19th century under the British Raj .
Architect Louis Kahn 's acclaimed modernist National Capital Complex , based on the geography and heritage of Bengal , was inaugurated in Dhaka in 1982 as one of the largest legislative complexes in the world .
The city has endured periods of martial law , war and natural calamities .
It continues to confront challenges faced by growing metropolises in developing countries , including poverty , pollution and congestion .
For much of recent history , Dhaka was characterised by roadside markets and small shops that sold a wide variety of goods .
Recent years have seen the widespread construction of shopping malls , multiplexes , hotels and restaurants attracting Dhaka 's growing middle class and wealthy residents .
Along with Bangladeshi cuisine and South Asian variants , a large variety of Western and Chinese cuisine is served at numerous restaurants and eateries .
Though restaurants offering multinational cuisine and fast-food chains like A&W , Burger King , KFC , Nando 's , Pizza Hut , Pizza Inn and Sbarro have opened up their outlets in major areas of the city , Dhaka 's delicacies such as Biriani from Haji 's , Nanna 's and Fakhruddin , Dhaka Cheese , Star Kabab , Burhani , Lassi and Phuchka are highly popular among locals and tourists .
The city has numerous venerable Bengali confectionery chains , including Banoful , Alauddin , Bikrampur Mishti Bhandar and Rashmela .
The education system is divided into 5 levels : Primary -LRB- from grades 1 to 6 -RRB- , Junior -LRB- from grades 6 to 8 -RRB- , Secondary -LRB- from grades 9 to 10 -RRB- , Higher Secondary -LRB- from grades 11 to 12 -RRB- and tertiary .
The five years of Primary education concludes with a Primary School Completion -LRB- PSC -RRB- Examination , the three years of Junior education concludes with Junior School Certificate -LRB- JSC -RRB- Examination , and next two years of Secondary education concludes with a Secondary School Certificate -LRB- SSC -RRB- Examination .
Students who pass this examination proceed to two years of Higher Secondary or intermediate training , which culminate in a Higher Secondary School Certificate -LRB- HSC -RRB- Examination .
Education is mainly offered in Bengali , but English is also widely taught and used .
Many Muslim families send their children to attend part-time courses or even to pursue full-time religious education alongside other subjects , which is imparted in Bengali and Arabic in schools , colleges and madrasas .
The Dhaka Elevated Expressway would run from Shahjalal International Airport-Kuril-Banani-Mohakhali-Tejgaon-Saatrasta-Moghbazar Rail Crossing-Khilgaon-Kamalapur-Golapbagh to Dhaka-Chittagong Highway at Kutubkhali Point .
A longer second elevated expressway from Airport-Ashulia is currently undergoing feasibility study .
A 21.5 kilometres -LRB- 13.4 mi -RRB- , $ 1.7 Billion Phase 1 , metro route is being negotiated by the Government with Japan International Cooperation Agency .
The first route will start from Uttara , northern suburb of Dhaka to Sayedabad , southern section of Dhaka .
The route consists of 16 elevated stations each of 180m long .
Construction began on 26 June 2016 .
Each currency typically has a main currency unit -LRB- the dollar , for example , or the euro -RRB- and a fractional unit , often defined as 1⁄100 of the main unit : 100 cents = 1 dollar , 100 centimes = 1 franc , 100 pence = 1 pound , although units of 1⁄10 or 1⁄1000 occasionally also occur .
Mauritania and Madagascar are the only remaining countries that do not use the decimal system ; instead , the Mauritanian ouguiya is in theory divided into 5 khoums , while the Malagasy ariary is theoretically divided into 5 iraimbilanja .
In these countries , words like dollar or pound `` were simply names for given weights of gold . ''
Due to inflation khoums and iraimbilanja have in practice fallen into disuse .
In Europe , paper money was first introduced on a regular basis in Sweden in 1661 -LRB- although Washington Irving records an earlier emergency use of it , by the Spanish in a siege during the Conquest of Granada -RRB- .
As Sweden was rich in copper , its low value necessitated extraordinarily big coins , often weighing several kilograms .
In amphibians and most reptiles , a double circulatory system is used , but the heart is not always completely separated into two pumps .
The open circulatory system is a system in which a fluid in a cavity called the hemocoel bathes the organs directly with oxygen and nutrients and there is no distinction between blood and interstitial fluid ; this combined fluid is called hemolymph or haemolymph .
Muscular movements by the animal during locomotion can facilitate hemolymph movement , but diverting flow from one area to another is limited .
When the heart relaxes , blood is drawn back toward the heart through open-ended pores -LRB- ostia -RRB- .
Hemolymph fills all of the interior hemocoel of the body and surrounds all cells .
Hemolymph is composed of water , inorganic salts -LRB- mostly sodium , chlorine , potassium , magnesium , and calcium -RRB- , and organic compounds -LRB- mostly carbohydrates , proteins , and lipids -RRB- .
Galen believed that the arterial blood was created by venous blood passing from the left ventricle to the right by passing through ` pores ' in the interventricular septum , air passed from the lungs via the pulmonary artery to the left side of the heart .
As the arterial blood was created ` sooty ' vapors were created and passed to the lungs also via the pulmonary artery to be exhaled .
Chinese -LRB- 汉语 / 漢語 ; Hànyǔ or 中文 ; Zhōngwén -RRB- is a group of related , but in many cases mutually unintelligible , language varieties , forming a branch of the Sino-Tibetan language family .
Chinese is spoken by the Han majority and many other ethnic groups in China .
Nearly 1.2 billion people -LRB- around 16 % of the world 's population -RRB- speak some form of Chinese as their first language .
The Chinese had no uniform phonetic transcription system until the mid-20th century , although enunciation patterns were recorded in early rime books and dictionaries .
Early Indian translators , working in Sanskrit and Pali , were the first to attempt to describe the sounds and enunciation patterns of Chinese in a foreign language .
After the 15th century , the efforts of Jesuits and Western court missionaries resulted in some rudimentary Latin transcription systems , based on the Nanjing Mandarin dialect .
Like any other language , Chinese has absorbed a sizable number of loanwords from other cultures .
Most Chinese words are formed out of native Chinese morphemes , including words describing imported objects and ideas .
However , direct phonetic borrowing of foreign words has gone on since ancient times .
Western foreign words representing Western concepts have influenced Chinese since the 20th century through transcription .
From French came 芭蕾 bāléi `` ballet '' and 香槟 xiāngbīn , `` champagne '' ; from Italian , 咖啡 kāfēi `` caffè '' .
Later , the United States soft influences gave rise to 迪斯科 dísikē / dísīkē `` disco '' , 可乐 / 可樂 kělè `` cola '' , and 迷你 mínǐ `` mini -LSB- skirt -RSB- '' .
Some are staple foods but most are accessory foodstuffs , adding variety to meals with their unique flavors and at the same time , adding nutrients necessary for health .
Some vegetables are perennials but most are annuals and biennials , usually harvested within a year of sowing or planting .
Whatever system is used for growing crops , cultivation follows a similar pattern ; preparation of the soil by loosening it , removing or burying weeds , and adding organic manures or fertilisers ; sowing seeds or planting young plants ; tending the crop while it grows to reduce weed competition , control pests , and provide sufficient water ; harvesting the crop when it is ready ; sorting , storing , and marketing the crop or eating it fresh from the ground .
Proper post-harvest storage aimed at extending and ensuring shelf life is best effected by efficient cold chain application .
Cold storage is particularly useful for vegetables such as cauliflower , eggplant , lettuce , radish , spinach , potatoes , and tomatoes , the optimum temperature depending on the type of produce .
There are temperature-controlling technologies that do not require the use of electricity such as evaporative cooling .
Storage of fruit and vegetables in controlled atmospheres with high levels of carbon dioxide or high oxygen levels can inhibit microbial growth and extend storage life .
Traditionally , Confucius was thought to be the author or editor of the Five Classics which were the basic texts of Confucianism .
The scholar Yáo Xīnzhōng allows that there are good reasons to believe that Confucian classics took shape in the hands of Confucius , but that `` nothing can be taken for granted in the matter of the early versions of the classics . ''
Yáo reports that perhaps most scholars today hold the `` pragmatic '' view that Confucius and his followers , although they did not intend to create a system of classics , `` contributed to their formation . ''
In any case , it is undisputed that for most of the last 2,000 years , Confucius was believed to have either written or edited these texts .
Rén , translated as `` humaneness '' or the essence proper of a human being , is the character of compassionate mind ; it is the virtue endowed by Heaven and at the same time the means by which man can achieve oneness with Heaven or return to Heaven , or comprehend his divine nature .
In the Dàtóng shū -LRB- 大同書 / 大同书 -RRB- it is defined as `` to form one body with all things '' and `` when the self and others are not separated ... compassion is aroused '' .
Confucius used the term in a religious way .
He wrote in the Analects -LRB- 7.23 -RRB- that Tian gave him life , and that Tian watched and judged .
A person can know the movement of the Tiān , giving the sense of having a special place in the universe .
-LRB- 9.5 -RRB- Confucius wrote that Tian spoke to him , though not in words -LRB- 17.19 -RRB- , but the scholar Ronnie Littlejohn warns that Tian was not a personal God comparable to the God of the Abrahamic faiths in the sense of an independent creator or transcendent Being .
When Confucians spoke of Tian they often meant something like what the Taoists meant by Tao -LRB- Dào -RRB- : `` the way things are '' or `` the regularities of the world . ''
Tiān can also be compared to the Brahman of Hindu and Vedic traditions .
Regarding personal gods -LRB- shén , energies who emanate from and reproduce the Tiān -RRB- enliving nature , in Analects 6.22 Confucius says that it is appropriate -LRB- 義 / 义 , yì -RRB- for people to worship -LRB- 敬 , jìng -RRB- them , though through proper rites -LRB- 禮 / 礼 , lǐ -RRB- , implying respect of positions and discretion .
In Analects 3.12 he explains that religious rituals produce meaningful experiences .
Rites and sacrifices to the gods have an ethical importance : they generate good life , because taking part in them leads to the overcoming of the self .
Analects 10.11 tells that Confucius always took a small part of his food and placed it on the sacrificial bowls as an offering to his ancestors .
Strictly speaking , there is no term in Chinese which directly corresponds to `` Confucianism '' .
In the Chinese language , the character rú 儒 meaning `` scholar '' or `` learned man '' is generally used both in the past and the present to refer to things related to Confucianism .
Some examples include , `` weak '' , `` soft '' , `` to tame '' , `` to comfort '' and `` to educate '' or `` to refine '' .
Several different terms are used in different situations , several of which are of modern origin :
Although Confucius claimed that he never invented anything but was only transmitting ancient knowledge -LRB- Analects 7.1 -RRB- , he did produce a number of new ideas .
Many European and American admirers such as Voltaire and H. G. Creel point to the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with nobility of virtue .
`` lord 's child '' -RRB- , which originally signified the younger , non-inheriting , offspring of a noble , became , in Confucius ' work , an epithet having much the same meaning and evolution as the English `` gentleman '' .
A complex number is a number that can be expressed in the form a + bi , where a and b are real numbers and i is the imaginary unit , satisfying the equation i2 = − 1 .
The next step in the Cayley -- Dickson construction , the sedenions , in fact fails to have this structure .
As shown earlier , c − di is the complex conjugate of the denominator c + di .
This is called `` rationalization '' of the denominator -LRB- although the denominator in the final expression might be an irrational real number -RRB- .
This gives another characterization of C as a topological field , since C can be distinguished from R because the nonzero complex numbers are connected , while the nonzero real numbers are not .
A real number a can be regarded as a complex number a + 0i whose imaginary part is 0 .
It is common to write a for a + 0i and bi for 0 + bi .
Moreover , when the imaginary part is negative , it is common to write a − bi with b > 0 instead of a + -LRB- − b -RRB- i , for example 3 − 4i instead of 3 + -LRB- − 4 -RRB- i.
Studies on natural events require complete historical records and strategies related to obtaining and storing reliable records , allowing for both critical interpretation and validation of the sources .
Under this point of view the irreplaceable role of traditional repositories -LRB- archives -RRB- can be supplemented by the use of such web sources as eBay .
Sharia , the religious law in Islam , requires capital punishment for certain crimes .
Strangulation was the prescribed sentence for lodging an accusation against one 's parents or grandparents with a magistrate , scheming to kidnap a person and sell them into slavery and opening a coffin while desecrating a tomb .
Despite the great discomfort involved , most of the Tang Chinese preferred strangulation to decapitation , as a result of the traditional Tang Chinese belief that the body is a gift from the parents and that it is , therefore , disrespectful to one 's ancestors to die without returning one 's body to the grave intact .
Similarly , the discriminatory option between capital punishment and monetary compensation for crimes such as murder is controversial , where jurists have asked if poor offenders face trial and capital punishment while wealthy offenders are able to avoid a trial by paying off the Qisas compensation money .
A woman 's life is considered half the worth of a man , while Christians and Jews are worth half of a Muslim , and the life of Buddhist , Hindu , folk religion or atheist is considered 1/16th the worth of a Muslim by some Islamist governments .
This has reporedly led certain Islamic nations to discriminate between Muslims and non-Muslims while imposing capital punishment and compensation , for both intentional murder and manslaughter , depending on whether the victim is Muslim or non-Muslim , as well as based on the religion of the individual who has committed the crime .
These forms of execution remain part of the religious law enforced in Saudi Arabia , Yemen , Qatar , United Arab Emirates , Iran , Pakistan and Mauritania .
When a minister of the fifth grade or above received a death sentence the emperor might grant him a special dispensation allowing him to commit suicide in lieu of execution .
Even when this privilege was not granted , the law required that the condemned minister be provided with food and ale by his keepers and transported to the execution ground in a cart rather than having to walk there .
These were mainly property offences , for example cutting down a cherry tree in an orchard .
In 1820 , there were 160 , including crimes such as shoplifting , petty theft or stealing cattle .
The severity of the so-called Bloody Code was often tempered by juries who refused to convict , or judges , in the case of petty theft , who arbitrarily set the value stolen at below the statutory level for a capital crime .
The death penalty was banned in China between 747 and 759 .
In Japan , Emperor Saga abolished the death penalty in 818 under the influence of Shinto and it lasted until 1156 .
In the United Kingdom , it was abolished for murder -LRB- leaving only treason , piracy with violence , arson in royal dockyards and a number of wartime military offences as capital crimes -RRB- for a five-year experiment in 1965 and permanently in 1969 , the last execution having taken place in 1964 .
This was soon followed by the fall of Communism in Europe .
Many of the countries which restored democracy aspired to enter the EU .
The European Union and the Council of Europe both strictly require member states not to practise the death penalty -LRB- see Capital punishment in Europe -RRB- .
The last execution on the present day territory of the Council of Europe took place in 1997 in Ukraine .
On the other hand , rapid industrialisation in Asia has been increasing the number of developed retentionist countries .
In these countries , the death penalty enjoys strong public support , and the matter receives little attention from the government or the media ; in China there is a small but growing movement to abolish the death penalty altogether .
This trend has been followed by some African and Middle Eastern countries where support for the death penalty is high .
Starting in 1642 within British America , an estimated 365 juvenile offenders were executed by the states and federal government of the United States .
The United States Supreme Court abolished capital punishment for offenders under the age of 16 in Thompson v. Oklahoma -LRB- 1988 -RRB- , and for all juveniles in Roper v. Simmons -LRB- 2005 -RRB- .
Crimes against humanity such as genocide are usually punishable by death in countries retaining capital punishment .
Death sentences for such crimes were handed down and carried out during the Nuremberg Trials in 1946 and the Tokyo Trials in 1948 , but the current International Criminal Court does not use capital punishment .
The newly created South Sudan is among the 111 UN member states that supported the resolution passed by the United Nations General Assembly that called for the removal of the death penalty , therefore affirming its opposition to the practice .
South Sudan , however , has not yet abolished the death penalty and stated that it must first amend its Constitution , and until that happens it will continue to use the death penalty .
Many stories in Buddhist scripture stress the superior power of the Buddha 's teaching to rehabilitate murderers and other criminals .
The most well-known example is Angulimala in the Theravadan Pali canon who had killed 999 people and then attempted to kill his own mother and the Buddha , but under the influence of the Buddha he repented and entered the monkhood .
The Buddha succeeded when the King and all his soldiers failed to eliminate the murderer by force .
In glycolysis , oligo/polysaccharides are cleaved first to smaller monosaccharides by enzymes called glycoside hydrolases .
The monosaccharide units can then enter into monosaccharide catabolism .
Often in lists of nutritional information , such as the USDA National Nutrient Database , the term `` carbohydrate '' -LRB- or `` carbohydrate by difference '' -RRB- is used for everything other than water , protein , fat , ash , and ethanol .
This will include chemical compounds such as acetic or lactic acid , which are not normally considered carbohydrates .
It also includes `` dietary fiber '' which is a carbohydrate but which does not contribute much in the way of food energy -LRB- calories -RRB- , even though it is often included in the calculation of total food energy just as though it were a sugar .
By the time the chyme has reached this tube , most nutrients and 90 % of the water have been absorbed by the body .
At this point some electrolytes like sodium , magnesium , and chloride are left as well as indigestible parts of ingested food -LRB- e.g. , a large part of ingested amylose , starch which has been shielded from digestion heretofore , and dietary fiber , which is largely indigestible carbohydrate in either soluble or insoluble form -RRB- .
As the chyme moves through the large intestine , most of the remaining water is removed , while the chyme is mixed with mucus and bacteria -LRB- known as gut flora -RRB- , and becomes feces .
The ascending colon receives fecal material as a liquid .
The muscles of the colon then move the watery waste material forward and slowly absorb all the excess water , causing the stools to gradually solidify as they move along into the descending colon .
Water absorption at the colon typically proceeds against a transmucosal osmotic pressure gradient .
This hypertonic fluid creates an osmotic pressure that drives water into the lateral intercellular spaces by osmosis via tight junctions and adjacent cells , which then in turn moves across the basement membrane and into the capillaries .
In the outer Solar System , comets remain frozen and inactive and are extremely difficult or impossible to detect from Earth due to their small size .
As a comet approaches the inner Solar System , solar radiation causes the volatile materials within the comet to vaporize and stream out of the nucleus , carrying dust away with them .
Periodic comets or short-period comets are generally defined as those having orbital periods of less than 200 years .
Comets whose aphelia are near a major planet 's orbit are called its `` family '' .
Such families are thought to arise from the planet capturing formerly long-period comets into shorter orbits .
As of November 2014 there are 5,253 known comets , a number that is steadily increasing as they are discovered .
However , this represents only a tiny fraction of the total potential comet population , as the reservoir of comet-like bodies in the outer Solar System -LRB- in the Oort cloud -RRB- is estimated to be one trillion .
Particularly bright examples are called `` Great Comets '' .
Comets have been visited by unmanned probes such as the European Space Agency 's Rosetta , which became the first ever to land a robotic spacecraft on a comet , and NASA 's Deep Impact , which blasted a crater on Comet Tempel 1 to study its interior .
In 1950 , Fred Lawrence Whipple proposed that rather than being rocky objects containing some ice , comets were icy objects containing some dust and rock .
This `` dirty snowball '' model soon became accepted and appeared to be supported by the observations of an armada of spacecraft -LRB- including the European Space Agency 's Giotto probe and the Soviet Union 's Vega 1 and Vega 2 -RRB- that flew through the coma of Halley 's Comet in 1986 , photographed the nucleus , and observed jets of evaporating material .
The moisture classification includes climatic classes with descriptors such as hyperhumid , humid , subhumid , subarid , semi-arid -LRB- values of − 20 to − 40 -RRB- , and arid -LRB- values below − 40 -RRB- .
Humid regions experience more precipitation than evaporation each year , while arid regions experience greater evaporation than precipitation on an annual basis .
Studies suggest that precipitation effectiveness -LRB- PE -RRB- within the Thornthwaite moisture index is overestimated in the summer and underestimated in the winter .
This index can be effectively used to determine the number of herbivore and mammal species numbers within a given area .
The index is also used in studies of climate change .
Matisse 's wife Amélie , who suspected that he was having an affair with her young Russian emigre companion , Lydia Delectorskaya , ended their 41-year marriage in July , 1939 , dividing their possessions equally between them .
Delectorskaya attempted suicide by shooting herself in the chest ; remarkably , she survived with no serious after-effects , and instead returned to the now-single Matisse and worked with him for the rest of his life , running his household , paying the bills , typing his correspondence , keeping meticulous records , assisting in the studio and coordinating his business affairs .
He moved to the hilltop of Vence in 1943 , where he produced his first major cut-out project for his artist 's book titled Jazz .
However , these cut-outs were conceived as designs for stencil prints to be looked at in the book , rather than as independent pictorial works .
His new understanding of this medium unfolds with the 1946 introduction for Jazz .
After summarizing his career , Matisse refers to the possibilities the cut-out technique offers , insisting `` An artist must never be a prisoner of himself , prisoner of a style , prisoner of a reputation , prisoner of success ... ''
Henri Matisse : The Cut-Outs was exhibited at London 's Tate Modern , from April to September 2014 .
The show was the largest and most extensive of the cut-outs ever mounted , including approximately 100 paper maquettes -- borrowed from international public and private collections -- as well as a selection of related drawings , prints , illustrated books , stained glass , and textiles .
In total , the retrospective featured 130 works encompassing his practice from 1937 to 1954 .
The Tate Modern show was the first in its history to attract more than half a million people .
With the model Caroline Joblau , he had a daughter , Marguerite , born in 1894 .
In 1898 he married Amélie Noellie Parayre ; the two raised Marguerite together and had two sons , Jean -LRB- born 1899 -RRB- and Pierre -LRB- born 1900 -RRB- .
Marguerite and Amélie often served as models for Matisse .
Islam was historically called Muhammadanism in Anglophone societies .
This term has fallen out of use and is sometimes said to be offensive because it suggests that a human being rather than God is central to Muslims ' religion , parallel to Jesus Christ in Christianity .
Some authors , however , continue to use the term Muhammadanism as a technical term for the religious system as opposed to the theological concept of Islam that exists within that system .
Some Muslims began to question the piety of indulgence in a worldly life and emphasized poverty , humility and avoidance of sin based on renunciation of bodily desires .
Ascetics such as Hasan al-Basri would inspire a movement that would evolve into Tasawwuf -LRB- Sufism -RRB- .
Beginning in the 13th century , Sufism underwent a transformation , largely because of efforts to legitimize and reorganize the movement by Al-Ghazali , who developed the model of the Sufi order -- a community of spiritual teachers and students .
The largest denomination in Islam is Sunni Islam , which makes up 75 % -- 90 % of all Muslims and is arguably the world 's largest religious denomination .
Sunni Muslims also go by the name Ahl as-Sunnah which means `` people of the tradition -LSB- of Muhammad -RSB- '' .
These hadiths , recounting Muhammad 's words , actions , and personal characteristics , are preserved in traditions known as Al-Kutub Al-Sittah -LRB- six major books -RRB- .
The majority of Muslims live in Asia and Africa .
Approximately 62 % of the world 's Muslims live in Asia , with over 683 million adherents in Indonesia , Pakistan , India , and Bangladesh .
Coffee is often consumed alongside -LRB- or instead of -RRB- breakfast by many at home or when eating out at diners or cafeterias .
The concept of fair trade labeling , which guarantees coffee growers a negotiated preharvest price , began in the late 1980s with the Max Havelaar Foundation 's labeling program in the Netherlands .
In 2004 , 24,222 metric tons -LRB- of 7,050,000 produced worldwide -RRB- were fair trade ; in 2005 , 33,991 metric tons out of 6,685,000 were fair trade , an increase from 0.34 % to 0.51 % .
A number of fair trade impact studies have shown that fair trade coffee produces a mixed impact on the communities that grow it .
Many studies are skeptical about fair trade , reporting that it often worsens the bargaining power of those who are not part of it .
Coffee was incorporated into the fair-trade movement in 1988 , when the Max Havelaar mark was introduced in the Netherlands .
The very first fair-trade coffee was an effort to import a Guatemalan coffee into Europe as `` Indio Solidarity Coffee '' .
It is one of the most valuable commodities exported by developing countries .
Green -LRB- unroasted -RRB- coffee is one of the most traded agricultural commodities in the world .
Some controversy is associated with coffee cultivation and the way developed countries trade with developing nations and the impact of its cultivation on the environment , in regards to clearing of land for coffee-growing and water use .
The best -LRB- but least used -RRB- method of drying coffee is using drying tables .
In this method , the pulped and fermented coffee is spread thinly on raised beds , which allows the air to pass on all sides of the coffee , and then the coffee is mixed by hand .
Most African coffee is dried in this manner and certain coffee farms around the world are starting to use this traditional method .
The first reference to coffee in the English language is in the form chaona , dated to 1598 and understood to be a misprint of chaoua , equivalent , in the orthography of the time , to chaova .
This term and `` coffee '' both derive from the Ottoman Turkish kahve , by way of the Italian caffè .
Cold brew coffee is made by steeping coarsely ground beans in cold water for several hours , then filtering them .
This results in a brew lower in acidity than most hot-brewing methods .
A 2012 meta-analysis concluded that people who drank moderate amounts of coffee had a lower rate of heart failure , with the biggest effect found for those who drank more than four cups a day .
Moreover , in one preliminary study , habitual coffee consumption was associated with improved vascular function .
Interestingly , a recent meta-analysis showed that coffee consumption was associated with a reduced risk of death in patients who have had a myocardial infarction .
Coffee caffeine may aggravate pre-existing conditions such as migraines , arrhythmias , and cause sleep disturbances .
Caffeine withdrawal from chronic use causes consistent effects typical of physical dependence , including headaches , mood changes and the possibility of reduced cerebral blood flow .
Widely known as coffeehouses or cafés , establishments serving prepared coffee or other hot beverages have existed for over five hundred years .
The council , however , generated significant controversy in implementing its reforms : proponents of the `` Spirit of Vatican II '' such as Swiss theologian Hans Küng said that Vatican II had `` not gone far enough '' to change church policies .
Traditionalist Catholics , such as Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre , however , strongly criticised the council , arguing that its liturgical reforms led `` to the destruction of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and the sacraments '' , among other issues .
Several teachings of the Catholic Church came under increased scrutiny both concurrent with and following the council ; among those teachings was the church 's teaching regarding the immorality of contraception .
The recent introduction of hormonal contraception -LRB- including `` the pill '' -RRB- , which were believed by some to be morally different than previous methods , prompted John XXIII to form a committee to advise him of the moral and theological issues with the new method .
Paul VI later expanded the committee 's scope to freely examine all methods , and the committee 's unreleased final report was rumoured to suggest permitting at least some methods of contraception .
Paul did not agree with the arguments presented , and eventually issued Humanae vitae , saying it upheld the constant teaching of the church against contraception , expressly including hormonal methods as prohibited .
A large negative response to this document followed its release .
In 2014 , the Third Extraordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops addressed the church 's ministry towards families and marriages and to Catholics in `` irregular '' relationships , such as those who divorced and remarried outside of the church without a declaration of nullity .
While welcomed by some , criticism on perceived unclarity has provoked controversies among individual representatives of differing perspectives .
Catholics believe that Jesus Christ is the `` Second Person '' of the Trinity , God the Son .
In an event known as the Incarnation , through the power of the Holy Spirit , God became united with human nature through the conception of Christ in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary .
Christ , therefore , is understood as being both fully divine and fully human , including possessing a human soul .
It is taught that Christ 's mission on earth included giving people his teachings and providing his example for them to follow as recorded in the four Gospels .
Jesus is believed to have remained sinless while on earth , and to have allowed himself to be unjustly executed by crucifixion , as sacrifice of himself to reconcile humanity to God ; this reconciliation is known as the Paschal Mystery .
The Greek term `` Christ '' and the Hebrew `` Messiah '' both mean `` anointed one '' , referring to the Christian belief that Jesus ' death and resurrection are the fulfilment of the Old Testament 's messianic prophecies .
Catholic belief holds that the Church `` is the continuing presence of Jesus on earth '' and that it alone possesses the full means of salvation .
Through the passion -LRB- suffering -RRB- of Christ leading to his crucifixion as described in the Gospels , it is said Christ made himself an oblation to God the Father in order to reconcile humanity to God ; the Resurrection of Jesus makes him the firstborn from the dead , the first among many brethren .
By reconciling with God and following Christ 's words and deeds , an individual can enter the Kingdom of God .
The Church sees its liturgy and sacraments as perpetuating the graces achieved through Christ 's sacrifice to strengthen a person 's relationship with Christ and aid in overcoming sin .
The Church teaches that no one is condemned to hell without having freely decided to reject God .
No one is predestined to hell and no one can determine with absolute certainty who has been condemned to hell .
Catholicism teaches that through God 's mercy a person can repent at any point before death , be illuminated with the truth of the Catholic faith , and thus obtain salvation .
Some Catholic theologians have speculated that the souls of unbaptised infants and non-Christians without mortal sin but who die in original sin are assigned to limbo , although this is not an official dogma of the Church .
Catholic Mariology deals with the doctrines and teachings concerning the life of the Mary , mother of Jesus , as well as the veneration of Mary by the faithful .
Mary is held in special regard , declared the Mother of God -LRB- Greek : Θεοτόκος , translit .
` God-bearer ' -RRB- , and believed as dogma to have remained a virgin throughout her life .
Further teachings include the doctrines of the Immaculate Conception -LRB- her own conception without the stain of original sin -RRB- and the Assumption of Mary -LRB- that her body was assumed directly into heaven at the end of her life -RRB- .
Both of these doctrines were defined as infallible dogma , by Pope Pius IX in 1854 and Pope Pius XII in 1950 respectively , but only after consulting with the Catholic bishops throughout the world to ascertain that this is a Catholic belief .
The Eastern Catholic Churches share common patrimony and liturgical rites as their counterparts , including Eastern Orthodox and other Eastern Christian churches who are no longer in communion with the Holy See .
These include churches that historically developed in Russia , Caucasus , the Balkans , North Eastern Africa , India and the Middle East .
The Eastern Catholic Churches are groups of faithful who have either never been out of communion with the Holy See or who have restored communion with it at the cost of breaking communion with their associates of the same tradition .
This remark and others made in the same interview were seen as a change in the tone , but not in the substance of the teaching of the Church , which includes opposition to same-sex marriage .
Certain dissenting Catholic groups oppose the position of the Catholic Church and seek to change it .
In the 7th and 8th centuries , expanding Muslim conquests following the advent of Islam led to an Arab domination of the Mediterranean that severed political connections between that area and northern Europe , and weakened cultural connections between Rome and the Byzantine Empire .
Conflicts involving authority in the church , particularly the authority of the Bishop of Rome finally culminated in the East -- West Schism in the 11th century , splitting the Church into the Catholic and Orthodox Churches .
Earlier splits within the Church occurred after the Council of Ephesus -LRB- 431 -RRB- and the Council of Chalcedon -LRB- 451 -RRB- .
However , a few Eastern Churches remained in communion with Rome , and portions of some others established communion in the 15th century and later , forming what are called the Eastern Catholic Churches .
The New Testament , in particular the Gospels , records Jesus ' activities and teaching , his appointment of the twelve Apostles and his Great Commission of the Apostles , instructing them to continue his work .
The book Acts of Apostles , tells of the founding of the Christian church and the spread of its message to the Roman empire .
The Catholic Church teaches that its public ministry began on Pentecost , occurring fifty days following the date Christ is believed to have resurrected .
At Pentecost , the Apostles are believed to have received the Holy Spirit , preparing them for their mission in leading the church .
The Catholic Church teaches that the college of bishops , led by the Bishop of Rome are the successors to the Apostles .
He conceived spiritual life in the whole universe as a great system of law penetrated by eternal truth , and from this source he gained the firm confidence that death does not end all .
In his 1799 doctorate in absentia , A new proof of the theorem that every integral rational algebraic function of one variable can be resolved into real factors of the first or second degree , Gauss proved the fundamental theorem of algebra which states that every non-constant single-variable polynomial with complex coefficients has at least one complex root .
Mathematicians including Jean le Rond d'Alembert had produced false proofs before him , and Gauss 's dissertation contains a critique of d'Alembert 's work .
Ironically , by today 's standard , Gauss 's own attempt is not acceptable , owing to implicit use of the Jordan curve theorem .
However , he subsequently produced three other proofs , the last one in 1849 being generally rigorous .
His attempts clarified the concept of complex numbers considerably along the way .
Gauss 's intellectual abilities attracted the attention of the Duke of Brunswick , who sent him to the Collegium Carolinum -LRB- now Braunschweig University of Technology -RRB- , which he attended from 1792 to 1795 , and to the University of Göttingen from 1795 to 1798 .
While at university , Gauss independently rediscovered several important theorems .
His breakthrough occurred in 1796 when he showed that a regular polygon can be constructed by compass and straightedge if and only if the number of sides is the product of distinct Fermat primes and a power of 2 .
This was a major discovery in an important field of mathematics ; construction problems had occupied mathematicians since the days of the Ancient Greeks , and the discovery ultimately led Gauss to choose mathematics instead of philology as a career .
Gauss was so pleased by this result that he requested that a regular heptadecagon be inscribed on his tombstone .
The stonemason declined , stating that the difficult construction would essentially look like a circle .
Bolyai 's son , János Bolyai , discovered non-Euclidean geometry in 1829 ; his work was published in 1832 .
For the entire content of the work ... coincides almost exactly with my own meditations which have occupied my mind for the past thirty or thirty-five years . ''
De Beauvoir published her first novel She Came to Stay in 1943 .
Olga was one of her students in the Rouen secondary school where de Beauvoir taught during the early 1930s .
Sartre tried to pursue Olga but she denied him , so he began a relationship with her sister Wanda , instead .
Upon his death , Sartre was still supporting Wanda .
He also supported Olga for years , until she met and married Jacques-Laurent Bost , a lover of de Beauvoir 's .
In the chapter `` Woman : Myth and Reality '' of The Second Sex , de Beauvoir argued that men had made women the `` Other '' in society by application of a false aura of `` mystery '' around them .
She argued that men used this as an excuse not to understand women or their problems and not to help them , and that this stereotyping was always done in societies by the group higher in the hierarchy to the group lower in the hierarchy .
She wrote that a similar kind of oppression by hierarchy also happened in other categories of identity , such as race , class and religion , but she claimed that it was nowhere more true than with gender in which men stereotyped women and used it as an excuse to organize society into a patriarchy .
Amphibians are ectothermic -LRB- cold-blooded -RRB- vertebrates that do not maintain their body temperature through internal physiological processes .
Their metabolic rate is low and as a result , their food and energy requirements are limited .
They have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as urea .
Most amphibians lay their eggs in water and have aquatic larvae that undergo metamorphosis to become terrestrial adults .
Amphibians breathe by means of a pump action in which air is first drawn into the buccopharyngeal region through the nostrils .
These are then closed and the air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat .
In the adult state , they have tear ducts and movable eyelids , and most species have ears that can detect airborne or ground vibrations .
They have muscular tongues , which in many species can be protruded .
Their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales , apart from a few fish-like scales in certain caecilians .
The skin contains many mucous glands and in some species , poison glands .
Their job is to filter the blood of metabolic waste and transport the urine via ureters to the urinary bladder where it is stored before being passed out periodically through the cloacal vent .
Larvae and most aquatic adult amphibians excrete the nitrogen as ammonia in large quantities of dilute urine , while terrestrial species , with a greater need to conserve water , excrete the less toxic product urea .
Some tree frogs with limited access to water excrete most of their metabolic waste as uric acid .
The eggs of amphibians are typically laid in water and hatch into free-living larvae that complete their development in water and later transform into either aquatic or terrestrial adults .
In many species of frog and in most lungless salamanders -LRB- Plethodontidae -RRB- , direct development takes place , the larvae growing within the eggs and emerging as miniature adults .
Many caecilians and some other amphibians lay their eggs on land , and the newly hatched larvae wriggle or are transported to water bodies .
Their larvae feed on glandular secretions and develop within the female 's oviduct , often for long periods .
The eggs are retained in or on the parent 's body , but the larvae subsist on the yolks of their eggs and receive no nourishment from the adult .
The larvae emerge at varying stages of their growth , either before or after metamorphosis , according to their species .
The toad genus Nectophrynoides exhibits all of these developmental patterns among its dozen or so members .
Many amphibians are nocturnal and hide during the day , thereby avoiding diurnal predators that hunt by sight .
Other amphibians use camouflage to avoid being detected .
The blackbelly salamander -LRB- Desmognathus quadramaculatus -RRB- can bite an attacking common garter snake -LRB- Thamnophis sirtalis -RRB- two or three times its size on the head and often manages to escape .
Some salamanders adopt defensive poses when faced by a potential predator such as the North American northern short-tailed shrew -LRB- Blarina brevicauda -RRB- .
Their bodies writhe and they raise and lash their tails which makes it difficult for the predator to avoid contact with their poison-producing granular glands .
A few salamanders will autotomise their tails when attacked , sacrificing this part of their anatomy to enable them to escape .
The tail may have a constriction at its base to allow it to be easily detached .
The tail is regenerated later , but the energy cost to the animal of replacing it is significant .
Giant salamanders of the genus Andrias , as well as Ceratophrine and Pyxicephalus frogs possess sharp teeth and are capable of drawing blood with a defensive bite .
An embolic stroke refers to an arterial embolism -LRB- a blockage of an artery -RRB- by an embolus , a traveling particle or debris in the arterial bloodstream originating from elsewhere .
An embolus is most frequently a thrombus , but it can also be a number of other substances including fat -LRB- e.g. , from bone marrow in a broken bone -RRB- , air , cancer cells or clumps of bacteria -LRB- usually from infectious endocarditis -RRB- .
It is most commonly due to heart failure from cardiac arrest or arrhythmias , or from reduced cardiac output as a result of myocardial infarction , pulmonary embolism , pericardial effusion , or bleeding .
Hypoxemia -LRB- low blood oxygen content -RRB- may precipitate the hypoperfusion .
Because the reduction in blood flow is global , all parts of the brain may be affected , especially vulnerable `` watershed '' areas - border zone regions supplied by the major cerebral arteries .
A watershed stroke refers to the condition when the blood supply to these areas is compromised .
Blood flow to these areas does not necessarily stop , but instead it may lessen to the point where brain damage can occur .
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis leads to stroke due to locally increased venous pressure , which exceeds the pressure generated by the arteries .
Infarcts are more likely to undergo hemorrhagic transformation -LRB- leaking of blood into the damaged area -RRB- than other types of ischemic stroke .
Many mobility problems can be improved by the use of ankle foot orthoses .
PT and OT have overlapping areas of expertise ; however , PT focuses on joint range of motion and strength by performing exercises and relearning functional tasks such as bed mobility , transferring , walking and other gross motor functions .
Physiotherapists can also work with patients to improve awareness and use of the hemiplegic side .
Rehabilitation involves working on the ability to produce strong movements or the ability to perform tasks using normal patterns .
Emphasis is often concentrated on functional tasks and patient 's goals .
One example physiotherapists employ to promote motor learning involves constraint-induced movement therapy .
Through continuous practice the patient relearns to use and adapt the hemiplegic limb during functional activities to create lasting permanent changes .
OT is involved in training to help relearn everyday activities known as the activities of daily living -LRB- ADLs -RRB- such as eating , drinking , dressing , bathing , cooking , reading and writing , and toileting .
Compared with other societies , civilizations have a more complex political structure , namely the state .
The ruling class , normally concentrated in the cities , has control over much of the surplus and exercises its will through the actions of a government or bureaucracy .
Morton Fried , a conflict theorist and Elman Service , an integration theorist , have classified human cultures based on political systems and social inequality .
This system of classification contains four categories
The earliest emergence of civilizations is generally associated with the final stages of the Neolithic Revolution , culminating in the relatively rapid process of urban revolution and state formation , a political development associated with the appearance of a governing elite .
The earlier neolithic technology and lifestyle was established first in the Middle East -LRB- for example at Göbekli Tepe , from about 9,130 BCE -RRB- , and later in the Yangtze and Yellow River basins in China -LRB- for example the Pengtoushan culture from 7,500 BCE -RRB- , and later spread .
Mesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the Neolithic Revolution from around 10,000 BCE , with civilizations developing from 6,500 years ago .
This area has been identified as having `` inspired some of the most important developments in human history including the invention of the wheel , the development of cursive script , mathematics , astronomy and agriculture . ''
The process of sedentarization is first thought to have occurred around 12,000 BCE in the Levant region of southwest Asia though other regions around the world soon followed .
The emergence of civilization is generally associated with the Neolithic , or Agricultural Revolution , which occurred in various locations between 8,000 and 5,000 BCE , specifically in southwestern/southern Asia , northern/central Africa and Central America .
At first , the Neolithic was associated with shifting subsistence cultivation , where continuous farming led to the depletion of soil fertility resulting in the requirement to cultivate fields further and further removed from the settlement , eventually compelling the settlement itself to move .
In major semi-arid river valleys , annual flooding renewed soil fertility every year , with the result that population densities could rise significantly .
This encouraged a secondary products revolution in which people used domesticated animals not just for meat , but also for milk , wool , manure and pulling ploughs and carts -- a development that spread through the Eurasian Oecumene .
The 8.2 Kiloyear Arid Event and the 5.9 Kiloyear Interpluvial saw the drying out of semiarid regions and a major spread of deserts .
This climate change shifted the cost-benefit ratio of endemic violence between communities , which saw the abandonment of unwalled village communities and the appearance of walled cities , associated with the first civilizations .
This `` urban revolution '' marked the beginning of the accumulation of transferrable surpluses , which helped economies and cities develop .
Cultural Historian Morris Berman suggests in Dark Ages America : the End of Empire that in the corporate consumerist United States , the very factors that once propelled it to greatness -- extreme individualism , territorial and economic expansion , and the pursuit of material wealth -- have pushed the United States across a critical threshold where collapse is inevitable .
Politically associated with over-reach , and as a result of the environmental exhaustion and polarization of wealth between rich and poor , he concludes the current system is fast arriving at a situation where continuation of the existing system saddled with huge deficits and a hollowed-out economy is physically , socially , economically and politically impossible .
Although developed in much more depth , Berman 's thesis is similar in some ways to that of Urban Planner , Jane Jacobs who argues that five pillars of United States culture that are in serious decay : community and family ; higher education ; the effective practice of science ; taxation and government ; and the self-regulation of the learned professions .
The corrosion of these pillars , Jacobs argues , is linked to societal ills such as environmental crisis , racism and the growing gulf between rich and poor .
Soybeans , like most legumes , perform nitrogen fixation by establishing a symbiotic relationship with the bacterium Bradyrhizobium japonicum -LRB- syn .
For best results , though , an inoculum of the correct strain of bacteria should be mixed with the soybean -LRB- or any legume -RRB- seed before planting .
Modern crop cultivars generally reach a height of around 1 m -LRB- 3.3 ft -RRB- , and take 80 -- 120 days from sowing to harvesting .
The earliest Japanese textual reference to the soybean is in the classic Kojiki -LRB- Records of Ancient Matters -RRB- , which was completed in 712 CE .
Recent research , however , indicates that seeding of wild forms started early -LRB- before 5000 BCE -RRB- in multiple locations through China , Korea and Japan The Great Soviet Encyclopedia claims soybean cultivation originated in China about 5000 years ago .
Some scholars suggest that soybean originated in China and was domesticated about 3500 BCE .
However , the oldest preserved soybeans resembling modern varieties in size and shape were found in archaeological sites in Korea dated about 1000 BCE Radiocarbon dating of soybean samples recovered through flotation during excavations at the Early Mumun period Okbang site in Korea indicated soybean was cultivated as a food crop in around 1000 -- 900 BCE .
The cultivation of soybeans began in the eastern half of northern China by 2000 BCE , but is almost certainly much older .
However , the details of where , when , and under what circumstances soybean developed a close relationship with people are poorly understood .
Soy bean was unknown in South China before the Han period From about the first century CE to the Age of Discovery -LRB- 15 -- 16th century -RRB- , soybeans were introduced into several countries , such as India , Japan , Indonesia , the Philippines , Vietnam , Thailand , Cambodia , Malaysia , Burma and Nepal .
Soybeans are one of the `` biotech food '' crops that have been genetically modified , and genetically modified soybeans are being used in an increasing number of products .
In 1995 , Monsanto company introduced glyphosate-tolerant soybeans that have been genetically modified to be resistant to Monsanto 's glyphosate herbicides through substitution of the Agrobacterium sp .
Some reviews have expressed the opinion that more research is needed to determine what effect the phytoestrogens in soybeans may have on infants .
Diverse studies have concluded there are no adverse effects in human growth , development , or reproduction as a result of the consumption of soy-based infant formula .
One of these studies , published in the Journal of Nutrition , concludes that there are :
SBIFs provide complete nutrition that adequately supports normal infant growth and development .
FDA has accepted SBIFs as safe for use as the sole source of nutrition .
The AHA did not conduct a formal statistical analysis of the 22 studies upon which they based their estimate of the potency of soy protein .
When such an analysis was conducted , Jenkins et al. found that the AHA had considerably underestimated the hypocholesterolemic effects of soy protein .
Further , when the analysis was limited to the 11 studies that provided evidence that the control and soy diets were matched , soy protein was found to lower LDL by 5.2 percent .
Furthermore , recent research suggests that soy protein decreases postprandial triglyceride levels , which is increasingly viewed as important for reducing coronary heart disease risk .
When compared to human breast fed or cow milk formula fed diets , which contain isoflavone levels of 0.005-0 .01 mg/day , soy-based infant formulas contain isoflavone levels of 6 -- 47 mg/day that constitute several orders of magnitude greater than they receive from other sources of nutrition .
A 2001 literature review noted that disturbing data on soy 's effect on the cognitive function of the elderly existed .
In 2008 , an epidemiological study of 719 Indonesian elderly individuals found that tofu intake was associated with worse memory , but tempeh -LRB- a fermented soy product -RRB- intake was associated with better memory .
6th of October City , west of Cairo , and New Cairo , east of Cairo , are major urban developments which have been built to accommodate additional growth and development of the Cairo area .
New development includes several high-end residential developments .
Al-Azhar University , based in Cairo , is considered the leading authority of Sunni Islam worldwide .
Until his death in March 2012 , Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria was the leader of the Coptic Orthodox Church , followed by Pope Tawadros II who became Pope on November 18 , 2012 , whose residence is in Cairo .
Cairo has several synagogues , but few Jews remain after Israel was established and the subsequent exodus , largely due to state sponsored discrimination .
Tension between members of different religions has increased recently .
Tahrir Square was founded during the mid 19th century with the establishment of modern downtown Cairo .
It was first named Ismailia Square , after the 19th-century ruler Khedive Ismail , who commissioned the new downtown district 's ` Paris on the Nile ' design .
After the Egyptian Revolution of 1919 the square became widely known as Tahrir -LRB- Liberation -RRB- Square , though it was not officially renamed as such until after the 1952 Revolution which eliminated the monarchy .
Several notable buildings surround the square including , the American University in Cairo 's downtown campus , the Mogamma governmental administrative Building , the headquarters of the Arab League , the Nile Ritz Carlton Hotel , and the Egyptian Museum .
Being at the heart of Cairo , the square witnessed several major protests over the years .
While the first mosque in Egypt was the Mosque of Amr ibn al-As in Fustat , the Mosque of Ibn Tulun is the oldest mosque to retain its original form and is a rare example of Abbasid architecture , from the classical period of Islamic civilization .
It was built in 876 -- 879 AD in a style inspired by the Abbasid capital of Samarra in Iraq .
Another Abbasid construction , the Nilometer on Rhoda Island , is the oldest original structure in Cairo , built in 862 AD .
In 968 , the Fatimids were led by General Jawhar al-Siqilli with his Kutama army , to establish a new capital for the Fatimid dynasty .
Egypt was conquered from their base in Ifriqiya and a new fortified city northeast of Fustat was established .
It took four years for Jawhar to build the city , initially known as al-Manṣūriyyah , which was to serve as the new capital of the caliphate .
During that time , Jawhar also commissioned the construction of the al-Azhar Mosque , which developed into the third-oldest university in the world .
Cairo would eventually become a centre of learning , with the library of Cairo containing hundreds of thousands of books .
When Caliph al-Mu ` izz li Din Allah finally arrived from the old Fatimid capital of Mahdia in Tunisia in 973 , he gave the city its present name , al-Qahira -LRB- `` The Victorious '' -RRB- .
Pigeons and doves exhibit considerable variations in size .
The largest species is the crowned pigeon of New Guinea , which is nearly turkey-sized , at a weight of 2 -- 4 kg -LRB- 4.4 -- 8.8 lb -RRB- The smallest is the New World ground-dove of the genus Columbina , which is the same size as a house sparrow and weighs as little as 22 g -LRB- 0.049 lb -RRB- .
With a total length of more than 50 cm -LRB- 20 in -RRB- and weight of almost 1 kg -LRB- 2.2 lb -RRB- , the largest arboreal species is the Marquesan imperial pigeon , while the dwarf fruit dove , which may measure as little as 13 cm -LRB- 5.1 in -RRB- , has a marginally smaller total length than any other species from this family .
The river flows through central Russia and into the Caspian Sea , and is widely regarded as the national river of Russia .
The word horologia -LRB- from the Greek ὡρα , hour , and λέγειν , to tell -RRB- was used to describe early mechanical clocks , but the use of this word -LRB- still used in several Romance languages -RRB- for all timekeepers conceals the true nature of the mechanisms .
For example , there is a record that in 1176 Sens Cathedral installed a ` horologe ' but the mechanism used is unknown .
According to Jocelin of Brakelond , in 1198 during a fire at the abbey of St Edmundsbury -LRB- now Bury St Edmunds -RRB- , the monks ` ran to the clock ' to fetch water , indicating that their water clock had a reservoir large enough to help extinguish the occasional fire .
The word clock -LRB- from the Celtic words clocca and clogan , both meaning `` bell '' -RRB- , which gradually supersedes `` horologe '' , suggests that it was the sound of bells which also characterized the prototype mechanical clocks that appeared during the 13th century in Europe .
In Europe , between 1280 and 1320 , there is an increase in the number of references to clocks and horologes in church records , and this probably indicates that a new type of clock mechanism had been devised .
Existing clock mechanisms that used water power were being adapted to take their driving power from falling weights .
This power was controlled by some form of oscillating mechanism , probably derived from existing bell-ringing or alarm devices .
This controlled release of power -- the escapement -- marks the beginning of the true mechanical clock , which differed from the previously mentioned cogwheel clocks .
Verge escapement mechanism derived in the surge of true mechanical clocks , which did n't need any kind of fluid power , like water or mercury , to work .
The next development in accuracy occurred after 1656 with the invention of the pendulum clock .
Galileo had the idea to use a swinging bob to regulate the motion of a time-telling device earlier in the 17th century .
Christiaan Huygens , however , is usually credited as the inventor .
The first model clock was built in 1657 in the Hague , but it was in England that the idea was taken up .
The longcase clock -LRB- also known as the grandfather clock -RRB- was created to house the pendulum and works by the English clockmaker William Clement in 1670 or 1671 .
It was also at this time that clock cases began to be made of wood and clock faces to utilize enamel as well as hand-painted ceramics .
The position of a ship at sea could be determined with reasonable accuracy if a navigator could refer to a clock that lost or gained less than about 10 seconds per day .
This clock could not contain a pendulum , which would be virtually useless on a rocking ship .
In 1714 , the British government offered large financial rewards to the value of 20,000 pounds , for anyone who could determine longitude accurately .
John Harrison , who dedicated his life to improving the accuracy of his clocks , later received considerable sums under the Longitude Act .
Organized crime has long been associated with New York City , beginning with the Forty Thieves and the Roach Guards in the Five Points in the 1820s .
The 20th century saw a rise in the Mafia , dominated by the Five Families , as well as in gangs , including the Black Spades .
The Mafia and gang presence has declined in the city in the 21st century .
The FDNY headquarters is located at 9 MetroTech Center in Downtown Brooklyn , and the FDNY Fire Academy is located on Randalls Island .
There are three Bureau of Fire Communications alarm offices which receive and dispatch alarms to appropriate units .
New York City is home to hundreds of cultural institutions and historic sites , many of which are internationally known .
Museum Mile is the name for a section of Fifth Avenue running from 82nd to 105th streets on the Upper East Side of Manhattan , in an area sometimes called Upper Carnegie Hill .
The Mile , which contains one of the densest displays of culture in the world , is actually three blocks longer than one mile -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- .
Ten museums occupy the length of this section of Fifth Avenue .
The tenth museum , the Museum for African Art , joined the ensemble in 2009 , although its museum at 110th Street , the first new museum constructed on the Mile since the Guggenheim in 1959 , opened in late 2012 .
In addition to other programming , the museums collaborate for the annual Museum Mile Festival , held each year in June , to promote the museums and increase visitation .
Many of the world 's most lucrative art auctions are held in New York City .
New York City also has an extensive web of expressways and parkways , which link the city 's boroughs to each other and to northern New Jersey , Westchester County , Long Island , and southwestern Connecticut through various bridges and tunnels .
Because these highways serve millions of outer borough and suburban residents who commute into Manhattan , it is quite common for motorists to be stranded for hours in traffic jams that are a daily occurrence , particularly during rush hour .
In 1664 , unable to summon any significant resistance , Stuyvesant surrendered New Amsterdam to English troops led by Colonel Richard Nicolls without bloodshed .
The terms of the surrender permitted Dutch residents to remain in the colony and allowed for religious freedom .
The transfer was confirmed in 1667 by the Treaty of Breda , which concluded the Second Anglo-Dutch War .
In 1861 , Mayor Fernando Wood called on the aldermen to declare independence from Albany and the United States after the South seceded , but his proposal was not acted on .
Anger at new military conscription laws during the American Civil War -LRB- 1861 -- 1865 -RRB- , which spared wealthier men who could afford to pay a $ 300 -LRB- equivalent to $ 5,835 in 2016 -RRB- commutation fee to hire a substitute , led to the Draft Riots of 1863 , whose most visible participants were ethnic Irish working class .
The situation deteriorated into attacks on New York 's elite , followed by attacks on black New Yorkers and their property after fierce competition for a decade between Irish immigrants and black people for work .
Rioters burned the Colored Orphan Asylum to the ground , with more than 200 children escaping harm due to efforts of the New York City Police Department , which was mainly made up of Irish immigrants .
In all , eleven black men were lynched over five days , and the riots forced hundreds of blacks to flee the city for Williamsburg , Brooklyn , and New Jersey ; the black population in Manhattan fell below 10,000 by 1865 , which it had last been in 1820 .
The white working class had established dominance .
Asian Americans in New York City , according to the 2010 Census , number more than one million , greater than the combined totals of San Francisco and Los Angeles .
The Chinese population constitutes the fastest-growing nationality in New York State ; multiple satellites of the original Manhattan Chinatown -LRB- 紐約華埠 -RRB- , in Brooklyn -LRB- 布鲁克林華埠 -RRB- , and around Flushing , Queens -LRB- 法拉盛華埠 -RRB- , are thriving as traditionally urban enclaves , while also expanding rapidly eastward into suburban Nassau County -LRB- 拿騷縣 -RRB- on Long Island -LRB- 長島 -RRB- , as the New York metropolitan region and New York State have become the top destinations for new Chinese immigrants , respectively , and large-scale Chinese immigration continues into New York City and surrounding areas .
A community numbering 20,000 Korean-Chinese -LRB- Chaoxianzu -LRB- Chinese : 朝鲜族 -RRB- or Joseonjok -LRB- Hangul : 조선족 -RRB- -RRB- is centered in Flushing , Queens , while New York City is also home to the largest Tibetan population outside China , India , and Nepal , also centered in Queens .
Koreans made up 1.2 % of the city 's population , and Japanese 0.3 % .
Filipinos were the largest Southeast Asian ethnic group at 0.8 % , followed by Vietnamese , who made up 0.2 % of New York City 's population in 2010 .
Indians are the largest South Asian group , comprising 2.4 % of the city 's population , with Bangladeshis and Pakistanis at 0.7 % and 0.5 % , respectively .
Queens is the preferred borough of settlement for Asian Indians , Koreans , Filipinos , and Malaysians and other Southeast Asians ; while Brooklyn is receiving large numbers of both West Indian and Asian Indian immigrants .
New York City has a high degree of income disparity as indicated by its Gini Coefficient of 0.5 for the city overall and 0.6 for Manhattan .
In the first quarter of 2014 , the average weekly wage in New York County -LRB- Manhattan -RRB- was $ 2,749 , representing the highest total among large counties in the United States .
As of 2016 , New York City had the second-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world with 95 , after Beijing , including former Mayor Michael Bloomberg .
Lower Manhattan has been experiencing a baby boom , with the area south of Canal Street witnessing 1,086 births in 2010 , 12 % greater than 2009 and over twice the number born in 2001 .
The biotechnology sector is also growing in New York City , based upon the city 's strength in academic scientific research and public and commercial financial support .
On December 19 , 2011 , then Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg announced his choice of Cornell University and Technion-Israel Institute of Technology to build a US$ 2 billion graduate school of applied sciences called Cornell Tech on Roosevelt Island with the goal of transforming New York City into the world 's premier technology capital .
By mid-2014 , Accelerator , a biotech investment firm , had raised more than US$ 30 million from investors , including Eli Lilly and Company , Pfizer , and Johnson & Johnson , for initial funding to create biotechnology startups at the Alexandria Center for Life Science , which encompasses more than 700,000 square feet -LRB- 65,000 m2 -RRB- on East 29th Street and promotes collaboration among scientists and entrepreneurs at the center and with nearby academic , medical , and research institutions .
The New York City Economic Development Corporation 's Early Stage Life Sciences Funding Initiative and venture capital partners , including Celgene , General Electric Ventures , and Eli Lilly , committed a minimum of US$ 100 million to help launch 15 to 20 ventures in life sciences and biotechnology .
I Love New York -LRB- stylized I ❤ NY -RRB- is both a logo and a song that are the basis of an advertising campaign and have been used since 1977 to promote tourism in New York City , and later to promote New York State as well .
The trademarked logo , owned by New York State Empire State Development , appears in souvenir shops and brochures throughout the city and state , some licensed , many not .
Manhattan was on track to have an estimated 90,000 hotel rooms at the end of 2014 , a 10 % increase from 2013 .
In October 2014 , the Anbang Insurance Group , based in China , purchased the Waldorf Astoria New York for US$ 1.95 billion , making it the world 's most expensive hotel ever sold .
Because Black has the advantage of playing the first move , the idea of awarding White some compensation came into being during the 20th century .
This is called komi , which gives white a 6.5-point compensation under Japanese rules -LRB- number of points varies by rule set -RRB- .
Under handicap play , White receives only a 0.5-point komi , to break a possible tie -LRB- `` jigo '' -RRB- .
If the eye is surrounded by Black stones , the `` suicide rule '' forbids White to place a stone in a single-point eye surround by Black unless the placement results in a capture of Black stones that creates a liberty for White 's new stone -LRB- or connected group -RRB- .
Effectively , the capture rule is applied before the suicide rule , and both are applied before White 's play is completed .
There are several tactical constructs aimed at capturing stones .
These are among the first things a player learns after understanding the rules .
Recognizing the possibility that stones can be captured using these techniques is an important step forward .
Novices often start by randomly placing stones on the board , as if it were a game of chance .
Learning the ways of life and death helps in a fundamental way to develop one 's strategic understanding of weak groups .
A player who both plays aggressively and can handle adversity is said to display kiai , or fighting spirit , in the game .
As of mid-2008 , there were well over 40 million Go players worldwide , the overwhelming majority of them living in East Asia .
The traditional Japanese goban is between 10 and 18 cm -LRB- 3.9 and 7.1 in -RRB- thick and has legs ; it sits on the floor -LRB- see picture -RRB- .
The natural resources of Japan have been unable to keep up with the enormous demand for the slow-growing Kaya trees ; both T. nucifera and T. californica take many hundreds of years to grow to the necessary size , and they are now extremely rare , raising the price of such equipment tremendously .
As Kaya trees are a protected species in Japan , they can not be harvested until they have died .
Thus , an old-growth , floor-standing Kaya goban can easily cost in excess of $ 10,000 with the highest-quality examples costing more than $ 60,000 .
The Tao Te Ching , often called simply Laozi after its reputed author , describes the Dao -LRB- or Tao -RRB- as the source and ideal of all existence : it is unseen , but not transcendent , immensely powerful yet supremely humble , being the root of all things .
People have desires and free will -LRB- and thus are able to alter their own nature -RRB- .
Many act `` unnaturally '' , upsetting the natural balance of the Dao .
The Daodejing intends to lead students to a `` return '' to their natural state , in harmony with Dao .
Language and conventional wisdom are critically assessed .
Taoism views them as inherently biased and artificial , widely using paradoxes to sharpen the point .
Popular -LRB- `` religious '' -RRB- Taoism typically presents the Jade Emperor as the official head deity .
In January 1883 , Mahler became conductor at a run-down theatre in Olmütz -LRB- now Olomouc -RRB- .
He later wrote : `` From the moment I crossed the threshold of the Olmütz theatre I felt like one awaiting the wrath of God . ''
Despite poor relations with the orchestra , Mahler brought five new operas to the theatre , including Bizet 's Carmen , and won over the press that had initially been hostile to him .
After a week 's trial at the Royal Theatre in the Hessian town of Kassel , Mahler became the theatre 's `` Musical and Choral Director '' from August 1883 .
The title concealed the reality that Mahler was subordinate to the theatre 's Kapellmeister , Wilhelm Treiber , who disliked him and set out to make his life miserable .
An ardent , but ultimately unfulfilled , love affair with soprano Johanna Richter led Mahler to write a series of love poems which became the text of his song cycle Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen -LRB- `` Songs of a Wayfarer '' -RRB- .
Mahler 's Hamburg post was as chief conductor , subordinate to the director , Bernhard Pohl -LRB- known as Pollini -RRB- who retained overall artistic control .
Pollini was prepared to give Mahler considerable leeway if the conductor could provide commercial as well as artistic success .
This Mahler did in his first season , when he conducted Wagner 's Tristan und Isolde for the first time and gave acclaimed performances of the same composer 's Tannhäuser and Siegfried .
Another triumph was the German premiere of Tchaikovsky 's Eugene Onegin , in the presence of the composer , who called Mahler 's conducting `` astounding , '' and later asserted in a letter that he believed Mahler was `` positively a genius . ''
Mahler 's demanding rehearsal schedules led to predictable resentment from the singers and orchestra with whom , according to music writer Peter Franklin , the conductor `` inspired hatred and respect in almost equal measure . ''
Bülow , who had spurned Mahler 's approaches in Kassel , had come to admire the younger man 's conducting style , and on Bülow 's death in 1894 Mahler took over the direction of the concerts .
Bohemia was then part of the Austrian Empire ; the Mahler family belonged to a German-speaking minority among Bohemians , and was also Jewish .
From this background the future composer developed early on a permanent sense of exile , `` always an intruder , never welcomed . ''
Bernhard Mahler supported his son 's ambitions for a music career , and agreed that the boy should try for a place at the Vienna Conservatory .
The young Mahler was auditioned by the renowned pianist Julius Epstein , and accepted for 1875 -- 76 .
Few of Mahler 's student compositions have survived ; most were abandoned when he became dissatisfied with them .
He destroyed a symphonic movement prepared for an end-of-term competition , after its scornful rejection by the autocratic director Joseph Hellmesberger on the grounds of copying errors .
Mahler may have gained his first conducting experience with the Conservatory 's student orchestra , in rehearsals and performances , although it appears that his main role in this orchestra was as a percussionist .
According to the National Development and Reform Commission of China , 366 grams of coal would produce 1 kWh of electricity during 2006 .
At full power , Three Gorges reduces coal consumption by 31 million tonnes per year , avoiding 100 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions , millions of tonnes of dust , one million tonnes of sulfur dioxide , 370,000 tonnes of nitric oxide , 10,000 tonnes of carbon monoxide , and a significant amount of mercury .
Hydropower saves the energy needed to mine , wash , and transport the coal from northern China .
The ship lift was not yet complete when the rest of the project was officially opened on May 20 , 2006 .
In November 2007 it was reported in the local media that construction of the ship lift started in October 2007 .
Plans also exist for the construction of short portage railways bypassing the dam area altogether .
Two short rail lines , one on each side of the river , are to be constructed .
A third , only marginally related concept was proposed in 1923 by Gilbert N. Lewis , which includes reactions with acid-base characteristics that do not involve a proton transfer .
A Lewis acid is a species that accepts a pair of electrons from another species ; in other words , it is an electron pair acceptor .
Contrast how the following reactions are described in terms of acid-base chemistry :
A strong acid is one that completely dissociates in water ; in other words , one mole of a strong acid HA dissolves in water yielding one mole of H + and one mole of the conjugate base , A − , and none of the protonated acid HA .
In contrast , a weak acid only partially dissociates and at equilibrium both the acid and the conjugate base are in solution .
In water each of these essentially ionizes 100 % .
The stronger an acid is , the more easily it loses a proton , H + .
Two key factors that contribute to the ease of deprotonation are the polarity of the H -- A bond and the size of atom A , which determines the strength of the H -- A bond .
Acid strengths are also often discussed in terms of the stability of the conjugate base .
All warfare is based on deception .
Hence , when we are able to attack , we must seem unable ; when using our forces , we must appear inactive ; when we are near , we must make the enemy believe we are far away ; when far away , we must make him believe we are near .
Camels are the ultimate pillars that support national economies of many developing countries , because they are useful for transport , and provide food in the form of meat and milk -LRB- Tariq et al. ,2010 -RRB- .
A camel carcass can provide a substantial amount of meat .
Camel meat is reported to taste like coarse beef , but older camels can prove to be very tough , although camel meat becomes more tender the more it is cooked .
The Abu Dhabi Officers ' Club serves a camel burger mixed with beef or lamb fat in order to improve the texture and taste .
In Karachi , Pakistan , some restaurants prepare nihari from camel meat .
The male dromedary carcass can weigh 300 -- 400 kg -LRB- 661 -- 882 lb -RRB- , while the carcass of a male Bactrian can weigh up to 650 kg -LRB- 1,433 lb -RRB- .
The carcass of a female dromedary weighs less than the male , ranging between 250 and 350 kg -LRB- 550 and 770 lb -RRB- .
The brisket , ribs and loin are among the preferred parts , and the hump is considered a delicacy .
It does well even in arid areas due to its unusual physiological behaviors and characteristics , which include tolerance to extreme temperatures , radiation from the sun , water paucity , rugged landscape and low vegetation -LRB- Aleme , 2013 -RRB- .
The name is derived the Classical Tibetan for `` Marsh River '' -LRB- འདམ ཆ , w ` Dam Chu -RRB- .
The Chumar River -LRB- 楚玛尔河 -RRB- is the Chinese name for the northern headwater of the Yangtze , which flows from the Hoh Xil Mountains in Qinghai into the Tongtian .
The Yangtze River plays a large role in the history , culture and economy of China .
The Yangtze River flows through a wide array of ecosystems and is habitat to several endemic and endangered species including the Chinese alligator , the finless porpoise , the Chinese paddlefish , the -LRB- possibly extinct -RRB- Yangtze River dolphin or baiji , and the Yangtze sturgeon .
For thousands of years , the river has been used for water , irrigation , sanitation , transportation , industry , boundary-marking and war .
At the northern tip of Jiangxi , Lake Poyang , the biggest freshwater lake in China , merges into the river .
The river then runs through Anhui and Jiangsu provinces , receiving more water from innumerable smaller lakes and rivers , and finally reaches the East China Sea at Shanghai .
In recent years , the river has suffered from industrial pollution , agricultural run-off , siltation , and loss of wetland and lakes , which exacerbates seasonal flooding .
Some sections of the river are now protected as nature reserves .
A stretch of the upstream Yangtze flowing through deep gorges in western Yunnan is part of the Three Parallel Rivers of Yunnan Protected Areas , a UNESCO World Heritage Site .
In mid-2014 the Chinese government announced it was building a multi-tier transport network , comprising railways , roads and airports , to create a new economic belt alongside the river .
Due to commercial use of the river , tourism , and pollution , the Yangtze is home to several seriously threatened species of large animals -LRB- in addition to fish -RRB- : the finless porpoise , baiji -LRB- Yangtze River dolphin -RRB- , Chinese alligator , Yangtze giant softshell turtle and Chinese giant salamander .
In December 2006 , the Yangtze River dolphin was declared functionally extinct after an extensive search of the river revealed no signs of the dolphin 's inhabitance .
In 2007 , a large , white animal was sighted and photographed in the lower Yangtze and was tentatively presumed to be a baiji .
However , as there have been no confirmed sightings since 2004 , the baiji is presumed to be functionally extinct at this time .
`` Baijis were the last surviving species of a large lineage dating back seventy million years and one of only six species of freshwater dolphins '' .
It has been argued that the extinction of the Yangtze River dolphin was a result of the completion of the Three Gorges Dam , a project that has affected many species of animals and plant life found only in the gorges area .
By the Han Dynasty , Jiang had come to mean any river in Chinese , and this river was distinguished as the `` Great River '' 大江 -LRB- Dàjiāng -RRB- .
The epithet 長 -LRB- of which the modern , simplified version 长 -RRB- , means `` long '' , was first formally applied to the river during the Six Dynasties period .
By the 6th century BC several cities had emerged as dominant in Greek affairs : Athens , Sparta , Corinth , and Thebes .
Each of them had brought the surrounding rural areas and smaller towns under their control , and Athens and Corinth had become major maritime and mercantile powers as well .
He compelled the majority of the city-states to join the League of Corinth , allying them to him , and preventing them from warring with each other .
Philip then entered into war against the Achaemenid Empire but was assassinated by Pausanias of Orestis early on in the conflict .
From about 750 BC the Greeks began 250 years of expansion , settling colonies in all directions .
To the east , the Aegean coast of Asia Minor was colonized first , followed by Cyprus and the coasts of Thrace , the Sea of Marmara and south coast of the Black Sea .
Inevitably smaller poleis might be dominated by larger neighbors , but conquest or direct rule by another city-state appears to have been quite rare .
Instead the poleis grouped themselves into leagues , membership of which was in a constant state of flux .
Later in the Classical period , the leagues would become fewer and larger , be dominated by one city -LRB- particularly Athens , Sparta and Thebes -RRB- ; and often poleis would be compelled to join under threat of war -LRB- or as part of a peace treaty -RRB- .
Even after Philip II of Macedon `` conquered '' the heartlands of ancient Greece , he did not attempt to annex the territory , or unify it into a new province , but simply compelled most of the poleis to join his own Corinthian League .
Athens fell under a tyranny in the second half of the 6th century .
When this tyranny was ended , the Athenians founded the world 's first democracy as a radical solution to prevent the aristocracy regaining power .
A citizens ' assembly -LRB- the Ecclesia -RRB- , for the discussion of city policy , had existed since the reforms of Draco in 621 BC ; all citizens were permitted to attend after the reforms of Solon -LRB- early 6th century -RRB- , but the poorest citizens could not address the assembly or run for office .
With the establishment of the democracy , the assembly became the de jure mechanism of government ; all citizens had equal privileges in the assembly .
However , non-citizens , such as metics -LRB- foreigners living in Athens -RRB- or slaves , had no political rights at all .
The Antikythera mechanism , a device for calculating the movements of planets , dates from about 80 BC , and was the first ancestor of the astronomical computer .
The device became famous for its use of a differential gear , previously believed to have been invented in the 16th century , and the miniaturization and complexity of its parts , comparable to a clock made in the 18th century .
The original mechanism is displayed in the Bronze collection of the National Archaeological Museum of Athens , accompanied by a replica .
The ancient Greeks also made important discoveries in the medical field .
He is referred to as the `` father of medicine '' in recognition of his lasting contributions to the field as the founder of the Hippocratic school of medicine .
This intellectual school revolutionized medicine in ancient Greece , establishing it as a discipline distinct from other fields that it had traditionally been associated with -LRB- notably theurgy and philosophy -RRB- , thus making medicine a profession .
The major time divisions of classical music up to 1900 are the early music period , which includes Medieval -LRB- 500 -- 1400 -RRB- and Renaissance -LRB- 1400 -- 1600 -RRB- eras , and the Common practice period , which includes the Baroque -LRB- 1600 -- 1750 -RRB- , Classical -LRB- 1750 -- 1830 -RRB- and Romantic -LRB- 1804 -- 1910 -RRB- eras .
Since 1900 , classical periods have been reckoned more by calendar century than by particular stylistic movements that have become fragmented and difficult to define .
The 20th century calendar period -LRB- 1901 -- 2000 -RRB- includes most of the early modern musical era -LRB- 1890 -- 1930 -RRB- , the entire high modern -LRB- mid 20th-century -RRB- , and the first 25 years of the contemporary or postmodern musical era -LRB- 1975 -- current -RRB- .
The 21st century has so far been characterized by a continuation of the contemporary/postmodern musical era .
The Medieval period includes music from after the fall of Rome to about 1400 .
Monophonic chant , also called plainsong or Gregorian chant , was the dominant form until about 1100 .
Polyphonic -LRB- multi-voiced -RRB- music developed from monophonic chant throughout the late Middle Ages and into the Renaissance , including the more complex voicings of motets .
Social dancing became more widespread , so musical forms appropriate to accompanying dance began to standardize .
It is in this time that the notation of music on a staff and other elements of musical notation began to take shape .
This invention made possible the separation of the composition of a piece of music from its transmission ; without written music , transmission was oral , and subject to change every time it was transmitted .
With a musical score , a work of music could be performed without the composer 's presence .
In respiratory physiology , the ventilation rate is the rate at which gas enters or leaves the lung .
Ventilation occurs via the respiratory center in the medulla oblongata and the pons of the brainstem .
These areas of the brain form a series of interconnected brain cells within the lower and middle brain stem which receive information about the arterial partial pressure of oxygen -LRB-
-RRB- varies minimally around 5.3 kPa -LRB- 40 mmHg -RRB- throughout the respiratory cycle -LRB- of inhalation and exhalation -RRB- .
A small amount of carbon dioxide is carried on the protein portion of the hemoglobin molecules as carbamino groups .
The total concentration of carbon dioxide -LRB- in the form of bicarbonate ions , dissolved CO2 , and carbamino groups -RRB- in arterial blood -LRB- i.e. after it has equilibrated with the alveolar air -RRB- is about 26 mM -LRB- or 58 ml/100 ml -RRB- , compared to the concentration of oxygen in saturated arterial blood of about 9 mM -LRB- or 20 ml/100 ml blood -RRB- .
The alveoli are open -LRB- via the airways -RRB- to the atmosphere , with the result that alveolar air pressure is exactly the same as the ambient air pressure at sea level , at altitude , or in any artificial atmosphere -LRB- e.g. a diving chamber , or decompression chamber -RRB- in which the individual is breathing freely .
With expansion of the lungs -LRB- through lowering of the diaphragm and expansion of the thoracic cage -RRB- the alveolar air now occupies a larger volume , and its pressure falls proportionally , causing air to flow in from the surroundings , through the airways , till the pressure in the alveoli is once again at the ambient air pressure .
The reverse obviously happens during exhalation .
A further minor complication exists at altitude .
A doubling or more of these small pressure differences could be achieved by only very minor adjustments to the breathing effort at high altitudes .
If the volume of the lungs were to be instantaneously doubled at the beginning of inhalation , the air pressure inside the lungs would be halved .
Thus , halving of the sea level air pressure -LRB- 100 kPa -RRB- results in an intrapulmonary air pressure of 50 kPa .
Doing the same at 5500 m , where the atmospheric pressure is only 50 kPa , the intrapulmonary air pressure falls to 25 kPa .
Therefore , the same change in lung volume at sea level results in a 50 kPa difference in pressure between the ambient air and the intrapulmonary air , whereas it result in a difference of only 25 kPa at 5500 m .
The driving pressure forcing air into the lungs during inhalation is therefore halved at this altitude .
The rate of inflow of air into the lungs during inhalation at sea level is therefore twice that which occurs at 5500 m. However , in reality , inhalation and exhalation occur far more gently and less abruptly than in the example given .
The differences between the atmospheric and intrapulmonary pressures , driving air in and out of the lungs during the breathing cycle , are in the region of only 2-3 kPa .
The movement of gas through the larynx , pharynx and mouth allows humans to speak , or phonate .
Vocalization , or singing , in birds occurs via the syrinx , an organ located at the base of the trachea .
The vibration of air flowing across the larynx -LRB- vocal cords -RRB- , in humans , and the syrinx , in birds , results in sound .
While the African wildcat is the ancestral subspecies from which domestic cats are descended , and wildcats and domestic cats can completely interbreed -LRB- being subspecies of the same species -RRB- , several intermediate stages occur between domestic pet and pedigree cats on one hand and entirely wild animals on the other .
The semiferal cat , a mostly outdoor cat , is not owned by any one individual , but is generally friendly to people and may be fed by several households .
Feral cats are associated with human habitation areas and may be fed by people or forage for food , but are typically wary of human interaction .
In their normal , relaxed position , the claws are sheathed with the skin and fur around the paw 's toe pads .
This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows the silent stalking of prey .
Cats can voluntarily extend their claws on one or more paws .
This special feature of the front paws , on the inside of the wrists , is the carpal pad , also found on the paws of big cats and dogs .
Cats do eat grass occasionally .
A proposed explanation is that cats use grass as a source of folic acid .
The average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent years .
In the early 1980s , it was about seven years , rising to 9.4 years in 1995 and 12 -- 15 years in 2014 .
However , cats have been reported as surviving into their 30s , with the oldest known cat , Creme Puff , dying at a verified age of 38 .
Cats are known for spending considerable amounts of time licking their coat to keep it clean .
The cat 's tongue has backwards-facing spines about 500 μm long , which are called papillae .
These contain keratin which makes them rigid so the papillae act like a hairbrush .
Some cats , particularly longhaired cats , occasionally regurgitate hairballs of fur that have collected in their stomachs from grooming .
Hairballs can be prevented with remedies that ease elimination of the hair through the gut , as well as regular grooming of the coat with a comb or stiff brush .
When cats become aggressive , they try to make themselves appear larger and more threatening by raising their fur , arching their backs , turning sideways and hissing or spitting .
Often , the ears are pointed down and back to avoid damage to the inner ear and potentially listen for any changes behind them while focused forward .
Fights usually consist of grappling and delivering powerful slaps to the face and body with the forepaws as well as bites .
Cats also throw themselves to the ground in a defensive posture to rake their opponent 's belly with their powerful hind legs .
Serious damage is rare , as the fights are usually short in duration , with the loser running away with little more than a few scratches to the face and ears .
However , fights for mating rights are typically more severe and injuries may include deep puncture wounds and lacerations .
Normally , serious injuries from fighting are limited to infections of scratches and bites , though these can occasionally kill cats if untreated .
Sexually active males are usually involved in many fights during their lives , and often have decidedly battered faces with obvious scars and cuts to their ears and nose .
Owing to the close similarity between play and hunting , cats prefer to play with objects that resemble prey , such as small furry toys that move rapidly , but rapidly lose interest -LRB- they become habituated -RRB- in a toy they have played with before .
Cats also tend to play with toys more when they are hungry .
String is often used as a toy , but if it is eaten , it can become caught at the base of the cat 's tongue and then move into the intestines , a medical emergency which can cause serious illness , even death .
Owing to the risks posed by cats eating string , it is sometimes replaced with a laser pointer 's dot , which cats may chase .
There are several important issues related to using a laser with a cat .
Lasers can cause blindness in cats .
Even lasers that are sold as `` eye safe '' can actually be much higher powered than claimed , and can cause damage to cats ' eyes .
In addition , the cat thinks of the laser dot as prey , but gets frustrated when unable to catch it .
A trigraph is made up of three letters , like the German ⟨ sch ⟩ , the Breton ⟨ c ' h ⟩ or the Milanese ⟨ oeu ⟩ .
In the orthographies of some languages , digraphs and trigraphs are regarded as independent letters of the alphabet in their own right .
The capitalization of digraphs and trigraphs is language-dependent , as only the first letter may be capitalized , or all component letters simultaneously -LRB- even for words written in titlecase , where letters after the digraph or trigraph are left in lowercase -RRB- .
Whilst the Romanization of such languages is used mostly at unofficial levels , it has been especially prominent in computer messaging where only the limited 7-bit ASCII code is available on older systems .
However , with the introduction of Unicode , Romanization is now becoming less necessary .
Note that keyboards used to enter such text may still restrict users to Romanized text , as only ASCII or Latin-alphabet characters may be available .
The eastern half of the Empire , including Greece , Turkey , the Levant , and Egypt , continued to use Greek as a lingua franca , but Latin was widely spoken in the western half , and as the western Romance languages evolved out of Latin , they continued to use and adapt the Latin alphabet .
Nervous tissue is composed of many nerve cells known as neurons which transmit information .
In some slow-moving radially symmetrical marine animals such as ctenophores and cnidarians -LRB- including sea anemones and jellyfish -RRB- , the nerves form a nerve net , but in most animals they are organized longitudinally into bundles .
In simple animals , receptor neurons in the body wall cause a local reaction to a stimulus .
In more complex animals , specialized receptor cells such as chemoreceptors and photoreceptors are found in groups and send messages along neural networks to other parts of the organism .
Neurons can be connected together in ganglia .
In higher animals , specialized receptors are the basis of sense organs and there is a central nervous system -LRB- brain and spinal cord -RRB- and a peripheral nervous system .
The latter consists of sensory nerves that transmit information from sense organs and motor nerves that influence target organs .
The peripheral nervous system is divided into the somatic nervous system which conveys sensation and controls voluntary muscle , and the autonomic nervous system which involuntarily controls smooth muscle , certain glands and internal organs , including the stomach .
Sharks and rays are basal fish with numerous primitive anatomical features similar to those of ancient fish , including skeletons composed of cartilage .
Their bodies tend to be dorso-ventrally flattened , they usually have five pairs of gill slits and a large mouth set on the underside of the head .
The dermis is covered with separate dermal placoid scales .
Cartilaginous fish produce a small number of large , yolky eggs .
Some species are ovoviviparous and the young develop internally but others are oviparous and the larvae develop externally in egg cases .
Lizards have skulls with only one fenestra on each side , the lower bar of bone below the second fenestra having been lost .
This results in the jaws being less rigidly attached which allows the mouth to open wider .
Lizards are mostly quadrupeds , with the trunk held off the ground by short , sideways-facing legs , but a few species have no limbs and resemble snakes .
The outer surface of the epidermis is normally formed of epithelial cells and secretes an extracellular matrix which provides support to the organism .
An endoskeleton derived from the mesoderm is present in echinoderms , sponges and some cephalopods .
Exoskeletons are derived from the epidermis and is composed of chitin in arthropods -LRB- insects , spiders , ticks , shrimps , crabs , lobsters -RRB- .
Calcium carbonate constitutes the shells of molluscs , brachiopods and some tube-building polychaete worms and silica forms the exoskeleton of the microscopic diatoms and radiolaria .
Other invertebrates may have no rigid structures but the epidermis may secrete a variety of surface coatings such as the pinacoderm of sponges , the gelatinous cuticle of cnidarians -LRB- polyps , sea anemones , jellyfish -RRB- and the collagenous cuticle of annelids .
The outer epithelial layer may include cells of several types including sensory cells , gland cells and stinging cells .
Derived from the Greek ἀνατέμνω anatemnō `` I cut up , cut open '' from ἀνά ana `` up '' , and τέμνω temnō `` I cut '' , anatomy is the scientific study of the structure of organisms including their systems , organs and tissues .
Anatomy is quite distinct from physiology and biochemistry , which deal respectively with the functions of those parts and the chemical processes involved .
For example , an anatomist is concerned with the shape , size , position , structure , blood supply and innervation of an organ such as the liver ; while a physiologist is interested in the production of bile , the role of the liver in nutrition and the regulation of bodily functions .
In 1600 BCE , the Edwin Smith Papyrus , an Ancient Egyptian medical text , described the heart , its vessels , liver , spleen , kidneys , hypothalamus , uterus and bladder , and showed the blood vessels diverging from the heart .
The Ebers Papyrus -LRB- c. 1550 BCE -RRB- features a `` treatise on the heart '' , with vessels carrying all the body 's fluids to or from every member of the body .
Asia covers an area of 44,579,000 square kilometres -LRB- 17,212,000 sq mi -RRB- , about 30 % of Earth 's total land area and 8.7 % of the Earth 's total surface area .
Some of these are of women held in servitude -LRB- as study of the society implied by the content reveals -RRB- .
The Assuwa league was a confederation of states in western Anatolia , defeated by the Hittites under Tudhaliya I around 1400 BC .
The epithet , lawiaiai , `` captives , '' associated with some of them identifies their origin .
One in particular , aswiai , identifies `` women of Asia . ''
Perhaps they were captured in Asia , but some others , Milatiai , appear to have been of Miletus , a Greek colony , which would not have been raided for slaves by Greeks .
Chadwick suggests that the names record the locations where these foreign women were purchased .
The name is also in the singular , Aswia , which refers both to the name of a country and to a female of it .
This Aswia appears to have been a remnant of a region known to the Hittites as Assuwa , centered on Lydia , or `` Roman Asia . ''
The coastal periphery was home to some of the world 's earliest known civilizations , each of them developing around fertile river valleys .
The civilizations in Mesopotamia , the Indus Valley and the Yellow River shared many similarities .
These civilizations may well have exchanged technologies and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel .
Other innovations , such as writing , seem to have been developed individually in each area .
Cities , states and empires developed in these lowlands .
In the late 1990s and early 2000s , the economies of China and India have been growing rapidly , both with an average annual growth rate of more than 8 % .
Other recent very-high-growth nations in Asia include Israel , Malaysia , Indonesia , Bangladesh , Pakistan , Thailand , Vietnam , Mongolia , Uzbekistan , Cyprus and the Philippines , and mineral-rich nations such as Kazakhstan , Turkmenistan , Iran , Brunei , the United Arab Emirates , Qatar , Kuwait , Saudi Arabia , Bahrain and Oman .
China and India alternated in being the largest economies in the world from 1 to 1800 A.D. China was a major economic power and attracted many to the east , and for many the legendary wealth and prosperity of the ancient culture of India personified Asia , attracting European commerce , exploration and colonialism .
The accidental discovery of America by Columbus in search for India demonstrates this deep fascination .
The Silk Road became the main East-West trading route in the Asian hitherland while the Straits of Malacca stood as a major sea route .
Asia has exhibited economic dynamism -LRB- particularly East Asia -RRB- as well as robust population growth during the 20th century , but overall population growth has since fallen .
Asia was the birthplace of most of the world 's mainstream religions including Christianity , Islam , Judaism , Hinduism , Buddhism , Confucianism , Taoism -LRB- or Daoism -RRB- , Jainism , Sikhism , Zoroastranism , as well as many other religions .
Given its size and diversity , the concept of Asia -- a name dating back to classical antiquity -- may actually have more to do with human geography than physical geography .
It also has a mix of many different climates ranging from the equatorial south via the hot desert in the Middle East , temperate areas in the east and the continental centre to vast subarctic and polar areas in Siberia .
The border between Asia and Europe was historically defined by European academics .
The Don River became unsatisfactory to northern Europeans when Peter the Great , king of the Tsardom of Russia , defeating rival claims of Sweden and the Ottoman Empire to the eastern lands , and armed resistance by the tribes of Siberia , synthesized a new Russian Empire extending to the Ural Mountains and beyond , founded in 1721 .
The major geographical theorist of the empire was actually a former Swedish prisoner-of-war , taken at the Battle of Poltava in 1709 and assigned to Tobolsk , where he associated with Peter 's Siberian official , Vasily Tatishchev , and was allowed freedom to conduct geographical and anthropological studies in preparation for a future book .
In Sweden , five years after Peter 's death , in 1730 Philip Johan von Strahlenberg published a new atlas proposing the Urals as the border of Asia .
The Russians were enthusiastic about the concept , which allowed them to keep their European identity in geography .
Tatishchev announced that he had proposed the idea to von Strahlenberg .
The latter had suggested the Emba River as the lower boundary .
Over the next century various proposals were made until the Ural River prevailed in the mid-19th century .
The border had been moved perforce from the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea into which the Ural River projects .
The border between the Black Sea and the Caspian is usually placed along the crest of the Caucasus Mountains , although it is sometimes placed further north .
Seeking national reconciliation between revolutionaries and Catholics , the Concordat of 1801 was signed on 15 July 1801 between Napoleon and Pope Pius VII .
The hostility of devout Catholics against the state had now largely been resolved .
It did not restore the vast church lands and endowments that had been seized during the revolution and sold off .
As a part of the Concordat , he presented another set of laws called the Organic Articles .
Napoleon 's educational reforms laid the foundation of a modern system of education in France and throughout much of Europe .
Napoleon synthesized the best academic elements from the Ancien Régime , The Enlightenment , and the Revolution , with the aim of establishing a stable , well-educated and prosperous society .
The system featured scholarships and strict discipline , with the result being a French educational system that outperformed its European counterparts , many of which borrowed from the French system .
Napoleon founded a number of state secondary schools -LRB- lycées -RRB- designed to produce a standardized education that was uniform across France .
All students were taught the sciences along with modern and classical languages .
Unlike the system during the Ancien Régime , religious topics did not dominate the curriculum , although they were present with the teachers from the clergy .
Napoleon hoped to use religion to produce social stability .
He gave special attention to the advanced centers , such as the École Polytechnique , that provided both military expertise and state-of-the-art research in science .
Napoleon made some of the first efforts at establishing a system of secular and public education .
After the fall of Napoleon , not only was Napoleonic Code retained by conquered countries including the Netherlands , Belgium , parts of Italy and Germany , but has been used as the basis of certain parts of law outside Europe including the Dominican Republic , the US state of Louisiana and the Canadian province of Quebec .
Napoleon acknowledged one illegitimate son : Charles Léon -LRB- 1806 -- 1881 -RRB- by Eléonore Denuelle de La Plaigne .
Alexandre Colonna-Walewski -LRB- 1810 -- 1868 -RRB- , the son of his mistress Maria Walewska , although acknowledged by Walewska 's husband , was also widely known to be his child , and the DNA of his direct male descendant has been used to help confirm Napoleon 's Y-chromosome haplotype .
Some contemporaries alleged that Bonaparte was put under house arrest at Nice for his association with the Robespierres following their fall in the Thermidorian Reaction in July 1794 , but Napoleon 's secretary Bourrienne disputed the allegation in his memoirs .
According to Bourrienne , jealousy was responsible , between the Army of the Alps and the Army of Italy -LRB- with whom Napoleon was seconded at the time -RRB- .
Bonaparte dispatched an impassioned defense in a letter to the commissar Saliceti , and he was subsequently acquitted of any wrongdoing .
The next phase of the campaign featured the French invasion of the Habsburg heartlands .
French forces in Southern Germany had been defeated by the Archduke Charles in 1796 , but the Archduke withdrew his forces to protect Vienna after learning about Napoleon 's assault .
In the first encounter between the two commanders , Napoleon pushed back his opponent and advanced deep into Austrian territory after winning at the Battle of Tarvis in March 1797 .
The Austrians were alarmed by the French thrust that reached all the way to Leoben , about 100 km from Vienna , and finally decided to sue for peace .
The Treaty of Leoben , followed by the more comprehensive Treaty of Campo Formio , gave France control of most of northern Italy and the Low Countries , and a secret clause promised the Republic of Venice to Austria .
Bonaparte marched on Venice and forced its surrender , ending 1,100 years of independence .
During the campaign , Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics .
He founded two newspapers : one for the troops in his army and another for circulation in France .
The royalists attacked Bonaparte for looting Italy and warned that he might become a dictator .
All told , Napoleon 's forces extracted an estimated $ 45 million in funds from Italy during their campaign there , another $ 12 million in precious metals and jewels ; atop that , his forces confiscated more than three-hundred priceless paintings and sculptures .
Bonaparte sent General Pierre Augereau to Paris to lead a coup d'état and purge the royalists on 4 September -- Coup of 18 Fructidor .
This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again but dependent on Bonaparte , who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria .
These negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Campo Formio , and Bonaparte returned to Paris in December as a hero .
He met Talleyrand , France 's new Foreign Minister -- who served in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon -- and they began to prepare for an invasion of Britain .
Before the formation of the Third Coalition , Napoleon had assembled an invasion force , the Armée d'Angleterre , around six camps at Boulogne in Northern France .
They never invaded , but Napoleon 's troops received careful and invaluable training for future military operations .
The men at Boulogne formed the core for what Napoleon later called La Grande Armée .
At the start , this French army had about 200,000 men organized into seven corps , which were large field units that contained 36 to 40 cannons each and were capable of independent action until other corps could come to the rescue .
A single corps properly situated in a strong defensive position could survive at least a day without support , giving the Grande Armée countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign .
On top of these forces , Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22,000 organized into two cuirassier divisions , four mounted dragoon divisions , one division of dismounted dragoons , and one of light cavalry , all supported by 24 artillery pieces .
By 1805 , the Grande Armée had grown to a force of 350,000 men , who were well equipped , well trained , and led by competent officers .
The initial military maneuvers began in September 1806 .
In a letter to Marshal Soult detailing the plan for the campaign , Napoleon described the essential features of Napoleonic warfare and introduced the phrase le bataillon-carré -LRB- `` square battalion '' -RRB- .
Historian David Chandler wrote of the Prussian forces : `` Never has the morale of any army been more completely shattered . ''
Despite their overwhelming defeat , the Prussians refused to negotiate with the French until the Russians had an opportunity to enter the fight .
In the bataillon-carré system , the various corps of the Grande Armée would march uniformly together in close supporting distance .
If any single corps was attacked , the others could quickly spring into action and arrive to help .
Napoleon invaded Prussia with 180,000 troops , rapidly marching on the right bank of the River Saale .
As in previous campaigns , his fundamental objective was to destroy one opponent before reinforcements from another could tip the balance of the war .
Upon learning the whereabouts of the Prussian army , the French swung westwards and crossed the Saale with overwhelming force .
At the twin battles of Jena and Auerstedt , fought on 14 October , the French convincingly defeated the Prussians and inflicted heavy casualties .
With several major commanders dead or incapacitated , the Prussian king proved incapable of effectively commanding the army , which began to quickly disintegrate .
In a vaunted pursuit that epitomized the `` peak of Napoleonic warfare , '' according to historian Richard Brooks , the French managed to capture 140,000 soldiers , over 2,000 cannons and hundreds of ammunition wagons , all in a single month .
By 17 May , the main Austrian army under Charles had arrived on the Marchfeld .
Charles kept the bulk of his troops several miles away from the river bank in hopes of concentrating them at the point where Napoleon decided to cross .
On 21 May , the French made their first major effort to cross the Danube , precipitating the Battle of Aspern-Essling .
The Austrians enjoyed a comfortable numerical superiority over the French throughout the battle ; on the first day , Charles disposed of 110,000 soldiers against only 31,000 commanded by Napoleon .
By the second day , reinforcements had boosted French numbers up to 70,000 .
The battle was characterized by a vicious back-and-forth struggle for the two villages of Aspern and Essling , the focal points of the French bridgehead .
By the end of the fighting , the French had lost Aspern but still controlled Essling .
A sustained Austrian artillery bombardment eventually convinced Napoleon to withdraw his forces back onto Lobau Island .
Both sides inflicted about 23,000 casualties on each other .
It was the first defeat Napoleon suffered in a major set-piece battle , and it caused excitement throughout many parts of Europe because it proved that he could be beaten on the battlefield .
Heartened by France 's loss in Russia , Prussia joined with Austria , Sweden , Russia , Great Britain , Spain , and Portugal in a new coalition .
Napoleon assumed command in Germany and inflicted a series of defeats on the Coalition culminating in the Battle of Dresden in August 1813 .
Napoleon withdrew back into France , his army reduced to 70,000 soldiers , and little cavalry ; he faced more than three times as many Allied troops .
The French were surrounded : British armies pressed from the south , and other Coalition forces positioned to attack from the German states .
Napoleon won a series of victories in the Six Days ' Campaign , though these were not significant enough to turn the tide .
The leaders of Paris surrendered to the Coalition in March 1814 .
In 1840 , Louis Philippe I obtained permission from the British to return Napoleon 's remains to France .
On 15 December 1840 , a state funeral was held .
The hearse proceeded from the Arc de Triomphe down the Champs-Élysées , across the Place de la Concorde to the Esplanade des Invalides and then to the cupola in St Jérôme 's Chapel , where it remained until the tomb designed by Louis Visconti was completed .
hypnic headache : moderate-severe headache that starts a few hours after falling asleep and lasts 15 -- 30 minutes .
The headache may recur several times during night .
Most headaches can be diagnosed by the clinical history alone .
If the symptoms described by the person sound dangerous , further testing with neuroimaging and/or lumbar puncture may be necessary .
In general , people complaining of their `` first '' or `` worst '' headache warrant imaging and further workup .
People with progressively worsening headache also warrant imaging , as they may have a mass or a bleed that is gradually growing , pressing on surrounding structures and causing worsening pain .
They present with sudden onset explosive pain around one eye and are accompanied by autonomic symptoms -LRB- tearing , runny nose and red eye -RRB- .
Tension headaches are the most common affecting about 1.6 billion people -LRB- 21.8 % of the population -RRB- followed by migraine headaches which affect about 848 million -LRB- 11.7 % -RRB- .
The classification uses numeric codes .
The top , one-digit diagnostic level includes 14 headache groups .
The first four of these are classified as primary headaches , groups 5-12 as secondary headaches , cranial neuralgia , central and primary facial pain and other headaches for the last two groups .
The ICHD-2 classification puts cranial neuralgias and other types of neuralgia in a different category .
According to this system , there are 19 types of neuralgias and headaches due to different central causes of facial pain .
Moreover , the ICHD-2 includes a category that contains all the headaches that can not be classified .
Only approximately 1 -- 5 % of people who seek emergency treatment for headaches have a serious underlying cause .
The MAR is intersected by two perpendicular ridges : the Azores -- Gibraltar Transform Fault , the boundary between the Nubian and Eurasian plates , intersects the MAR at the Azores Triple Junction , on either side of the Azores microplate , near the 40 ° N .
The formation of the Central American Isthmus closed the Central American Seaway at the end of the Pliocene 2.8 Ma ago .
The formation of the isthmus resulted in the migration and extinction of many land-living animals , known as the Great American Interchange , but the closure of the seaway resulted in a `` Great American Schism '' as it affected ocean currents , salinity , and temperatures in both the Atlantic and Pacific .
Marine organisms on both sides of the isthmus became isolated and either diverged or went extinct .
About 50 Ma the opening of the Drake Passage resulted from a change in the motions and separation rate of the South American and Antarctic plates .
First small ocean basins opened and a shallow gateway appeared during the Middle Eocene .
Mitochondrial DNA -LRB- mtDNA -RRB- studies indicate that 80 -- 60,000 years ago a major demographic expansion within Africa , derived from a single , small population , coincided with the emergence of behavioural complexity and the rapid MIS 5 -- 4 environmental changes .
This group of people not only expanded over the whole of Africa , but also started to disperse out of Africa into Asia , Europe , and Australasia around 65.000 years ago and quickly replaced the archaic humans in these regions .
During the Last Glacial Maximum -LRB- LGM -RRB- 20,000 years ago humans had to abandon their initial settlements along the European North Atlantic coast and retreat to the Mediterranean .
Following rapid climate changes at the end of the LGM this region was repopulated by Magdalenian culture .
Other hunter-gatherers followed in waves interrupted by large-scale hazards such as the Laacher See volcanic eruption , the inundation of Doggerland -LRB- now the North Sea -RRB- , and the formation of the Baltic Sea .
The European coasts of the North Atlantic were permanently populated about 9 -- 8.5 thousand years ago .
This human dispersal left abundant traces along the coasts of the Atlantic Ocean .
50 ka-old , deeply stratified shell middens found in Ysterfontein on the western coast of South Africa are associated with the Middle Stone Age -LRB- MSA -RRB- .
While their middens resemble 12-11 ka-old Late Stone Age -LRB- LSA -RRB- middens found on every inhabited continent , the 50-45 ka-old Enkapune Ya Muto in Kenya probably represents the oldest traces of the first modern humans to disperse out of Africa .
The most productive areas include the Grand Banks of Newfoundland , the Scotian Shelf , Georges Bank off Cape Cod , the Bahama Banks , the waters around Iceland , the Irish Sea , the Dogger Bank of the North Sea , and the Falkland Banks .
Fisheries have , however , undergone significant changes since the 1950s and global catches can now be divided into three groups of which only two are observed in the Atlantic : fisheries in the Eastern Central and South-West Atlantic oscillate around a globally stable value , the rest of the Atlantic is in overall decline following historical peaks .
The third group , `` continuously increasing trend since 1950 '' , is only found in the Indian Ocean and Western Pacific .
The ocean mixed layer plays an important role heat storage over seasonal and decadal time-scales , whereas deeper layers are affected over millennia and has a heat capacity about 50 times that of the mixed layer .
This heat uptake provides a time-lag for climate change but it also results in a thermal expansion of the oceans which contribute to sea-level rise .
21st century global warming will probably result in an equilibrium sea-level rise five times greater than today , whilst melting of glaciers , including that of the Greenland ice-sheet , expected to have virtually no effect during the 21st century , will probably result in a sea-level rise of 3 -- 6 m over a millennium .
The power of non-state actors resulted in a lower value placed on sovereignty in the 18th and 19th centuries , which further reduced the number of civil wars .
For example , the pirates of the Barbary Coast were recognized as de facto states because of their military power .
The Barbary pirates thus had no need to rebel against the Ottoman Empire -- their nominal state government -- to gain recognition for their sovereignty .
Conversely , states such as Virginia and Massachusetts in the United States of America did not have sovereign status , but had significant political and economic independence coupled with weak federal control , reducing the incentive to secede .
Historically , the international community would have targeted weak states for territorial absorption or colonial domination or , alternatively , such states would fragment into pieces small enough to be effectively administered and secured by a local power .
However , international norms towards sovereignty changed in the wake of World War II in ways that support and maintain the existence of weak states .
Weak states are given de jure sovereignty equal to that of other states , even when they do not have de facto sovereignty or control of their own territory , including the privileges of international diplomatic recognition and an equal vote in the United Nations .
Further , the international community offers development aid to weak states , which helps maintain the facade of a functioning modern state by giving the appearance that the state is capable of fulfilling its implied responsibilities of control and order .
The formation of a strong international law regime and norms against territorial aggression is strongly associated with the dramatic drop in the number of interstate wars , though it has also been attributed to the effect of the Cold War or to the changing nature of economic development .
Consequently , military aggression that results in territorial annexation became increasingly likely to prompt international condemnation , diplomatic censure , a reduction in international aid or the introduction of economic sanction , or , as in the case of 1990 invasion of Kuwait by Iraq , international military intervention to reverse the territorial aggression .
Similarly , the international community has largely refused to recognize secessionist regions , while keeping some secessionist self-declared states such as Somaliland in diplomatic recognition limbo .
While there is not a large body of academic work examining the relationship , Hironaka 's statistical study found a correlation that suggests that every major international anti-secessionist declaration increased the number of ongoing civil wars by +10 % , or a total +114 % from 1945 to 1997 .
The diplomatic and legal protection given by the international community , as well as economic support to weak governments and discouragement of secession , thus had the unintended effect of encouraging civil wars .
A comprehensive study of civil war was carried out by a team from the World Bank in the early 21st century .
The study framework , which came to be called the Collier -- Hoeffler Model , examined 78 five-year increments when civil war occurred from 1960 to 1999 , as well as 1,167 five-year increments of `` no civil war '' for comparison , and subjected the data set to regression analysis to see the effect of various factors .
The factors that were shown to have a statistically significant effect on the chance that a civil war would occur in any given five-year period were :
The new craze for chocolate brought with it a thriving slave market , as between the early 1600s and late 1800s , the laborious and slow processing of the cacao bean was manual .
Wind-powered and horse-drawn mills were used to speed production , augmenting human labor .
Heating the working areas of the table-mill , an innovation that emerged in France in 1732 , also assisted in extraction .
The most commonly grown bean is forastero , a large group of wild and cultivated cacaos , most likely native to the Amazon basin .
The source of most chocolate marketed , forastero cocoas are typically strong in classic `` chocolate '' flavor , but have a short duration and are unsupported by secondary flavors , producing `` quite bland '' chocolate .
Chocolate liquor is blended with the cocoa butter in varying quantities to make different types of chocolate or couvertures .
As a solid piece of chocolate , the cocoa butter fat particles are in a crystalline rigid structure that gives the chocolate its solid appearance .
Once heated , the crystals of the polymorphic cocoa butter are able to break apart from the rigid structure and allow the chocolate to obtain a more fluid consistency as the temperature increases -- the melting process .
When the heat is removed , the cocoa butter crystals become rigid again and come closer together , allowing the chocolate to solidify .
In 2009 , Salvation Army International Development -LRB- SAID -RRB- UK stated that 12,000 children have been trafficked on cocoa farms in the Ivory Coast of Africa , where half of the world 's chocolate is made .
SAID UK states that it is these child slaves who are likely to be working in `` harsh and abusive '' conditions for the production of chocolate , and an increasing number of health-food and anti-slavery organisations are now highlighting and campaigning against the use of trafficking in the chocolate industry .
Chocolat , a 1999 novel by Joanne Harris , tells the story of Vianne Rocher , a young mother , whose confections change the lives of the townspeople .
The 2000 film adaptation , Chocolat , also proved successful , grossing over US$ 150,000,000 worldwide , and receiving Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations for Best Picture , Best Actress , and Best Original Score .
The runoff problem is exacerbated by the loss of coastal wetlands which act as a natural filter for toxins and help deposit sediment .
The priorities for each region are created based on human and environmental threats and the Marine Bioregional Plans are drafted to address these priorities .
To assess different region 's priorities , three steps are taken , first , a bioregional profile is created , second , a bioregional plan is drafted , and third , the plan is finalised .
After the plan is finalised , activity in different bioregions may become limited based on particular threats an activity may pose .
When the Greeks adapted the Phoenician alphabet , they took over not only the letter shapes and sound values , but also the names by which the sequence of the alphabet could be recited and memorized .
In Phoenician , each letter name was a word that began with the sound represented by that letter ; thus ʾaleph , the word for `` ox '' , was used as the name for the glottal stop / ʔ / , bet , or `` house '' , for the / b / sound , and so on .
When the letters were adopted by the Greeks , most of the Phoenician names were maintained or modified slightly to fit Greek phonology ; thus , ʾaleph , bet , gimel became alpha , beta , gamma .
Various South Slavic dialects , similar to the modern Bulgarian and Macedonian languages , have been written in Greek script .
The modern South Slavic languages now use modified Cyrillic alphabets .
Greek letters are used to denote the brighter stars within each of the eighty-eight constellations .
In most constellations the brightest star is designated Alpha and the next brightest Beta etc. .
For historical reasons , the Greek designations of some constellations begin with a lower ranked letter .
Unicode supports polytonic orthography well enough for ordinary continuous text in modern and ancient Greek , and even many archaic forms for epigraphy .
With the use of combining characters , Unicode also supports Greek philology and dialectology and various other specialized requirements .
Most current text rendering engines do not render diacritics well , so , though alpha with macron and acute can be represented as U +03 B1 U +0304 U +0301 , this rarely renders well : ᾱ́ .
This block is based on ISO 8859-7 and is sufficient to write Modern Greek .
Constantine the Great -LRB- Latin : Flavius Valerius Aurelius Constantinus Augustus ; Greek : Κωνσταντῖνος ὁ Μέγας ; 27 February c. 272 AD -- 22 May 337 AD -RRB- , also known as Constantine I or Saint Constantine -LRB- in the Orthodox Church as Saint Constantine the Great , Equal-to-the-Apostles -RRB- , was a Roman Emperor from 306 to 337 AD .
His father became Caesar , the deputy emperor in the west , in 293 AD .
Constantine was sent east , where he rose through the ranks to become a military tribune under the emperors Diocletian and Galerius .
In 305 , Constantius was raised to the rank of Augustus , senior western emperor , and Constantine was recalled west to campaign under his father in Britannia -LRB- Britain -RRB- .
Acclaimed as emperor by the army at Eboracum -LRB- modern-day York -RRB- after his father 's death in 306 AD , Constantine emerged victorious in a series of civil wars against the emperors Maxentius and Licinius to become sole ruler of both west and east by 324 AD .
According to tradition , Peter 's remains were buried just outside the Circus , on the Mons Vaticanus across the Via Cornelia from the Circus , less than 150 metres -LRB- 490 ft -RRB- from his place of death .
The Via Cornelia was a road which ran east-to-west along the north wall of the Circus on land now covered by the southern portions of the Basilica and St. Peter 's Square .
A shrine was built on this site some years later .
Almost three hundred years later , Old St. Peter 's Basilica was constructed over this site .
Pope Julius II planned far more for St Peter 's than Nicholas V 's program of repair or modification .
Julius was at that time planning his own tomb , which was to be designed and adorned with sculpture by Michelangelo and placed within St Peter 's .
In 1505 Julius made a decision to demolish the ancient basilica and replace it with a monumental structure to house his enormous tomb and `` aggrandize himself in the popular imagination '' .
A competition was held , and a number of the designs have survived at the Uffizi Gallery .
A succession of popes and architects followed in the next 120 years , their combined efforts resulting in the present building .
The scheme begun by Julius II continued through the reigns of Leo X -LRB- 1513 -- 1521 -RRB- , Hadrian VI -LRB- 1522 -- 1523 -RRB- .
Bramante 's plan for the dome of St. Peter 's -LRB- 1506 -RRB- follows that of the Pantheon very closely , and like that of the Pantheon , was designed to be constructed in Tufa Concrete for which he had rediscovered a formula .
With the exception of the lantern that surmounts it , the profile is very similar , except that in this case the supporting wall becomes a drum raised high above ground level on four massive piers .
The solid wall , as used at the Pantheon , is lightened at St. Peter 's by Bramante piercing it with windows and encircling it with a peristyle .
The facade is often cited as the least satisfactory part of the design of St. Peter 's .
The reasons for this , according to James Lees-Milne , are that it was not given enough consideration by the Pope and committee because of the desire to get the building completed quickly , coupled with the fact that Maderno was hesitant to deviate from the pattern set by Michelangelo at the other end of the building .
Lees-Milne describes the problems of the façade as being too broad for its height , too cramped in its details and too heavy in the attic story .
The breadth is caused by modifying the plan to have towers on either side .
These towers were never executed above the line of the facade because it was discovered that the ground was not sufficiently stable to bear the weight .
One effect of the facade and lengthened nave is to screen the view of the dome , so that the building , from the front , has no vertical feature , except from a distance .
The baldacchino is surmounted not with an architectural pediment , like most baldacchini , but with curved Baroque brackets supporting a draped canopy , like the brocade canopies carried in processions above precious iconic images .
In this case , the draped canopy is of bronze , and all the details , including the olive leaves , bees , and the portrait heads of Urban 's niece in childbirth and her newborn son , are picked out in gold leaf .
The baldacchino stands as a vast free-standing sculptural object , central to and framed by the largest space within the building .
It is so large that the visual effect is to create a link between the enormous dome which appears to float above it , and the congregation at floor level of the basilica .
It is penetrated visually from every direction , and is visually linked to the Cathedra Petri in the apse behind it and to the four piers containing large statues that are at each diagonal .
Conscious breathing cetaceans sleep but can not afford to be unconscious for long , because they may drown .
While knowledge of sleep in wild cetaceans is limited , toothed cetaceans in captivity have been recorded to exhibit unihemispheric slow-wave sleep -LRB- USWS -RRB- , which means they sleep with one side of their brain at a time , so that they may swim , breathe consciously and avoid both predators and social contact during their period of rest .
Most whales are social animals , although a few species live in pairs or are solitary .
A group , known as a pod , usually consists of ten to fifty animals , but on occasion , such as mass availability of food or during mating season , groups may encompass more than one thousand individuals .
Many species of dolphins hunt accompany large tunas on hunting expeditions , following large schools of fish .
The killer whale hunts in pods and targets belugas and even larger whales .
Humpback whales , among others , form in collaboration bubble carpets to herd krill or plankton into bait balls before lunging at them .
In 1897 Dvořák 's daughter Otilie married his student , the composer Josef Suk .
In the same year , Dvořák visited Brahms on his deathbed and went to his funeral 6 April 1897 .
On 4 April 1900 Dvořák conducted his last concert with the Czech Philharmonic , performing Brahms ' Tragic Overture , Schubert 's `` Unfinished '' Symphony , Beethoven 's 8th Symphony .
First , around the actual date , six of his operas and the oratorio St. Ludmila were performed in Prague , but Dvořák was away in Vienna ; then in November 1901 came the `` postponed official birthday party ... In many towns all over Bohemia and Moravia , the Czech people celebrated his birthday . ''
The sequential numbering of his symphonies has also been confused : -LRB- a -RRB- they were initially numbered by order of publication , not composition ; -LRB- b -RRB- the first four symphonies to be composed were published after the last five ; and -LRB- c -RRB- the last five symphonies were not published in order of composition .
This explains why , for example , the New World Symphony was originally published as No. 5 , was later known as No. 8 , and definitively renumbered as No. 9 in the critical editions published in the 1950s .
In 1871 Dvořák left the Provisional Theatre orchestra in order to have more time for composing .
Up through 1871 Dvořák gave opus numbers only up to 5 among his first 26 compositions .
The first press mention of Antonín Dvořák appeared in the Hudební listy journal in June 1871 , and the first publicly performed composition was the song Vzpomínání -LRB- `` Reminiscence '' , October 1871 , musical evenings of L. Procházka -RRB- .
The opera The King and the Charcoal Burner was returned to Dvořák from the Provisional Theatre and said to be unperformable .
Its overture was premiered in 1872 in a Philharmonic concert conducted by Bedřich Smetana , but the full opera with the original score only in 1929 .
Clapham says Dvořák realized he had gone to `` extremes in attempting to follow the example of Wagner . ''
The alternate opera , called King and Charcoal Burner II , B. 42 , was premiered in Prague in 1874 .
While maternal mortality seldom results from safe abortions , unsafe abortions result in 70,000 deaths and 5 million disabilities per year .
Complications of unsafe abortion account for approximately an eighth of maternal mortalities worldwide , though this varies by region .
Secondary infertility caused by an unsafe abortion affects an estimated 24 million women .
The rate of unsafe abortions has increased from 44 % to 49 % between 1995 and 2008 .
Health education , access to family planning , and improvements in health care during and after abortion have been proposed to address this phenomenon .
If medical staff observe signs of life , they may be required to provide care : emergency medical care if the child has a good chance of survival and palliative care if not .
Induced fetal demise before termination of pregnancy after 20 -- 21 weeks gestation is recommended to avoid this .
Some medical scholars and abortion opponents have suggested that the Hippocratic Oath forbade Ancient Greek physicians from performing abortions ; other scholars disagree with this interpretation , and state the medical texts of Hippocratic Corpus contain descriptions of abortive techniques right alongside the Oath .
The physician Scribonius Largus wrote in 43 CE that the Hippocratic Oath prohibits abortion , as did Soranus , although apparently not all doctors adhered to it strictly at the time .
According to Soranus ' 1st or 2nd century CE work Gynaecology , one party of medical practitioners banished all abortives as required by the Hippocratic Oath ; the other party -- to which he belonged -- was willing to prescribe abortions , but only for the sake of the mother 's health .
Reasons for procuring induced abortions are typically characterized as either therapeutic or elective .
An abortion is medically referred to as a therapeutic abortion when it is performed to save the life of the pregnant woman ; prevent harm to the woman 's physical or mental health ; terminate a pregnancy where indications are that the child will have a significantly increased chance of premature morbidity or mortality or be otherwise disabled ; or to selectively reduce the number of fetuses to lessen health risks associated with multiple pregnancy .
An abortion is referred to as an elective or voluntary abortion when it is performed at the request of the woman for non-medical reasons .
Confusion sometimes arises over the term `` elective '' because `` elective surgery '' generally refers to all scheduled surgery , whether medically necessary or not .
A dense tropical rainforest in the DRC 's central river basin and eastern highlands is bordered on the west by the Albertine Rift -LRB- the western branch of Africa 's Great Rift System -RRB- .
In a campaign to identify himself with African nationalism , starting on 1 June 1966 , Mobutu renamed the nation 's cities : Léopoldville became Kinshasa -LSB- the country was now Democratic Republic of The Congo -- Kinshasa -RSB- , Stanleyville became Kisangani , Elisabethville became Lubumbashi , and Coquilhatville became Mbandaka .
This renaming campaign was completed in the 1970s .
On 27 November , Congolese foreign minister , Raymond Tshibanda , told the press no elections will be held in 2016 , after 20 December , the end of president Kabila 's term .
In a conference in Madagascar , Tshibanda said that Kabila 's government had `` consulted election experts '' from Congo , the United Nations and elsewhere , and that `` it has been decided that the voter registration operation will end on July 31 , 2017 , and that elections will take place in April 2018 . ''
Protests broke out in the country on 20 December when Kabila 's term in office ended .
Across the country dozens of protesters were killed and hundreds were arrested .
The tropical climate also produced the Congo River system which dominates the region topographically along with the rainforest it flows through , though they are not mutually exclusive .
The name for the Congo state is derived in part from the river .
The river basin -LRB- meaning the Congo River and all of its myriad tributaries -RRB- occupies nearly the entire country and an area of nearly 1,000,000 km2 -LRB- 390,000 sq mi -RRB- .
Major tributaries include the Kasai , Sangha , Ubangi , Ruzizi , Aruwimi , and Lulonga .
Female genital mutilation -LRB- FGM -RRB- is also practiced in DRC , although not on a large scale .
The prevalence of FGM is estimated at about 5 % of women .
FGM is illegal : the law imposes a penalty of two to five years of prison and a fine of 200,000 Congolese francs on any person who violates the `` physical or functional integrity '' of the genital organs .
The bony labyrinth refers to the bony compartment which contains the membranous labyrinth , contained within the temporal bone .
The inner ear structurally begins at the oval window , which receives vibrations from the incus of the middle ear .
Vibrations are transmitted into the inner ear into a fluid called endolymph , which fills the membranous labyrinth .
The endolymph is situated in two vestibules , the utricle and saccule , and eventually transmits to the cochlea , a spiral-shaped structure .
The cochlea consists of three fluid-filled spaces : the vestibular duct , the cochlear duct , and the tympanic duct .
Hair cells responsible for transduction -- changing mechanical changes into electrical stimuli are present in the organ of Corti in the cochlea .
The ear drum may become perforated in the event of a large sound or explosion , when diving or flying -LRB- called barotrauma -RRB- , or by objects inserted into the ear .
These may cause a discharge from the ear called otorrhea , and are often investigated by otoscopy and audiometry .
Skull fractures that go through the part of the skull containing the ear structures -LRB- the temporal bone -RRB- can also cause damage to the middle ear .
A cholesteatoma is a cyst of squamous skin cells that may develop from birth or secondary to other causes such as chronic ear infections .
Algorithm versus function computable by an algorithm : For a given function multiple algorithms may exist .
Rogers observes that `` It is ... important to distinguish between the notion of algorithm , i.e. procedure and the notion of function computable by algorithm , i.e. mapping yielded by procedure .
Algorithms were used in ancient Greece .
Babylonian clay tablets describe and employ algorithmic procedures to compute the time and place of significant astronomical events .
Symbols and rules : In rapid succession the mathematics of George Boole -LRB- 1847 , 1854 -RRB- , Gottlob Frege -LRB- 1879 -RRB- , and Giuseppe Peano -LRB- 1888 -- 1889 -RRB- reduced arithmetic to a sequence of symbols manipulated by rules .
Peano 's The principles of arithmetic , presented by a new method -LRB- 1888 -RRB- was `` the first attempt at an axiomatization of mathematics in a symbolic language '' .
It is bounded by Mexico and Central America to the west and south west , to the north by the Greater Antilles starting with Cuba , to the east by the Lesser Antilles , and to the south by the north coast of South America .
The Caribbean is home to about 9 % of the world 's coral reefs covering about 50,000 km2 -LRB- 19,000 sq mi -RRB- , most of which are located off the Caribbean Islands and the Central American coast .
Among them stands out the Belize Barrier Reef with an area of 96,300 ha which was declared a World Heritage Site in 1996 .
It forms part of the Great Mayan Reef also known as the MBRS and being over a thousand km in length is the world 's second longest .
In connection with the foregoing , the Institute of Marine Sciences and Limnology of the National Autonomous University of Mexico , conducted a regional study , funded by the Department of Technical Cooperation of the International Atomic Energy Agency , in which specialists from 11 Latin American countries -LRB- Colombia , Costa Rica , Cuba , Guatemala , Haiti , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua , Panama , Dominican Republic , Venezuela plus Jamaica -RRB- participated .
The findings indicate that heavy metals such as mercury , arsenic , and lead , have been identified in the coastal zone of the Caribbean Sea .
Analysis of toxic metals and hydrocarbons is based on the investigation of coastal sediments that have accumulated less than 50 meters deep during the last hundred and fifty years .
The project results were presented in Vienna in the forum `` Water Matters '' , and the 2011 General Conference of said multilateral organization .
The Caribbean region supports a large tourist industry .
The Caribbean Tourism Organization calculates that about 12 million people a year visit the area , including -LRB- in 1991 -- 1992 -RRB- about 8 million cruise ship tourists .
Tourism based upon scuba diving and snorkeling on coral reefs of many Caribbean islands makes a major contribution to their economies .
In Egypt , Alexander was portrayed as the son of Nectanebo II , the last pharaoh before the Persian conquest .
His defeat of Darius was depicted as Egypt 's salvation , `` proving '' Egypt was still ruled by an Egyptian .
Ancient authors recorded that Alexander was so pleased with portraits of himself created by Lysippos that he forbade other sculptors from crafting his image .
Lysippos had often used the contrapposto sculptural scheme to portray Alexander and other characters such as Apoxyomenos , Hermes and Eros .
Lysippos ' sculpture , famous for its naturalism , as opposed to a stiffer , more static pose , is thought to be the most faithful depiction .
Hephaestion 's death devastated Alexander .
This event may have contributed to Alexander 's failing health and detached mental state during his final months .
Even a solo dance may be undertaken solely for the satisfaction of the dancer .
Participatory dancers often all employ the same movements and steps but , for example , in the rave culture of electronic dance music , vast crowds may engage in free dance , uncoordinated with those around them .
On the other hand , some cultures lay down strict rules as to the particular dances in which , for example , men , women and children may or must participate .
During the first millennium BCE in India , many texts were composed which attempted to codify aspects of daily life .
It mainly deals with drama , in which dance plays an important part in Indian culture .
The text elaborates various hand-gestures -LRB- mudras -RRB- and classifies movements of the various limbs , steps and so on .
A strong continuous tradition of dance has since continued in India , through to modern times , where it continues to play a role in culture , ritual , and , notably , the Bollywood entertainment industry .
Many other contemporary dance forms can likewise be traced back to historical , traditional , ceremonial , and ethnic dance .
Traditionally , small bodies orbiting the Sun were classified as comets , asteroids , or meteoroids , with anything smaller than 10 meters across being called a meteoroid -LRB- such as in Beech and Steel 's 1995 paper -RRB- .
The term `` asteroid '' , from the Greek word for `` star-like '' , never had a formal definition , with the broader term minor planet being preferred by the International Astronomical Union .
Near-Earth asteroids , or NEAs , are asteroids that have orbits that pass close to that of Earth .
Asteroids that actually cross Earth 's orbital path are known as Earth-crossers .
As of June 2016 , 14,464 near-Earth asteroids are known and the number over one kilometre in diameter is estimated to be 900 -- 1,000 .
Naked extracellular DNA -LRB- eDNA -RRB- , most of it released by cell death , is nearly ubiquitous in the environment .
Its concentration in soil may be as high as 2 μg / L , and its concentration in natural aquatic environments may be as high at 88 μg / L. Various possible functions have been proposed for eDNA : it may be involved in horizontal gene transfer ; it may provide nutrients ; and it may act as a buffer to recruit or titrate ions or antibiotics .
Extracellular DNA acts as a functional extracellular matrix component in the biofilms of several bacterial species .
It may act as a recognition factor to regulate the attachment and dispersal of specific cell types in the biofilm ; it may contribute to biofilm formation ; and it may contribute to the biofilm 's physical strength and resistance to biological stress .
Nucleases are enzymes that cut DNA strands by catalyzing the hydrolysis of the phosphodiester bonds .
Nucleases that hydrolyse nucleotides from the ends of DNA strands are called exonucleases , while endonucleases cut within strands .
The most frequently used nucleases in molecular biology are the restriction endonucleases , which cut DNA at specific sequences .
For instance , the EcoRV enzyme shown to the left recognizes the 6-base sequence 5 ′ - GATATC-3 ′ and makes a cut at the horizontal line .
In nature , these enzymes protect bacteria against phage infection by digesting the phage DNA when it enters the bacterial cell , acting as part of the restriction modification system .
In technology , these sequence-specific nucleases are used in molecular cloning and DNA fingerprinting .
A DNA helix usually does not interact with other segments of DNA , and in human cells , the different chromosomes even occupy separate areas in the nucleus called `` chromosome territories '' .
This physical separation of different chromosomes is important for the ability of DNA to function as a stable repository for information , as one of the few times chromosomes interact is in chromosomal crossover which occurs during sexual reproduction , when genetic recombination occurs .
Chromosomal crossover is when two DNA helices break , swap a section and then rejoin .
Recombination allows chromosomes to exchange genetic information and produces new combinations of genes , which increases the efficiency of natural selection and can be important in the rapid evolution of new proteins .
DNA nanotechnology uses the unique molecular recognition properties of DNA and other nucleic acids to create self-assembling branched DNA complexes with useful properties .
DNA is thus used as a structural material rather than as a carrier of biological information .
This has led to the creation of two-dimensional periodic lattices -LRB- both tile-based and using the DNA origami method -RRB- and three-dimensional structures in the shapes of polyhedra .
DNA is a long polymer made from repeating units called nucleotides .
In all species it is composed of two helical chains , bound to each other by hydrogen bonds .
Both chains are coiled round the same axis , and have the same pitch of 34 ångströms -LRB- 3.4 nanometres -RRB- .
According to another study , when measured in a different solution , the DNA chain measured 22 to 26 ångströms wide -LRB- 2.2 to 2.6 nanometres -RRB- , and one nucleotide unit measured 3.3 Å -LRB- 0.33 nm -RRB- long .
Although each individual nucleotide repeating unit is very small , DNA polymers can be very large molecules containing millions to hundreds of millions of nucleotides .
For instance , the DNA in the largest human chromosome , chromosome number 1 , consists of approximately 220 million base pairs and would be 85 mm long if straightened .
Moreover , in living cells , the storage can be turned active by enzymes .
Light-gated protein domains fused to DNA processing enzymes are suitable for that task in vitro .
Fluorescent exonucleases can transmit the output according to the nucleotide they have read .
Gilgamesh observes that Utnapishtim seems no different from himself , and asks him how he obtained his immortality .
Utnapishtim explains that the gods decided to send a great flood .
When the raven fails to return , he opens the ark and frees its inhabitants .
Utnapishtim offers a sacrifice to the gods , who smell the sweet savor and gather around .
Ishtar vows that just as she will never forget the brilliant necklace that hangs around her neck , she will always remember this time .
When Enlil arrives , angry that there are survivors , she condemns him for instigating the flood .
Enlil blesses Utnapishtim and his wife , and rewards them with eternal life .
This account matches the flood story that concludes the Epic of Atrahasis -LRB- see also Gilgamesh flood myth -RRB- .
To save Utnapishtim the god Ea told him to build a boat .
His entire family went aboard together with his craftsmen and `` all the animals of the field '' .
A violent storm then arose which caused the terrified gods to retreat to the heavens .
Ishtar lamented the wholesale destruction of humanity , and the other gods wept beside her .
The storm lasted six days and nights , after which `` all the human beings turned to clay '' .
Utnapishtim weeps when he sees the destruction .
After defeating Huwawa , Gilgamesh refrains from slaying him , and urges Enkidu to hunt Huwawa 's `` seven auras '' .
Japanese animation studios were pioneers of many limited animation techniques , and have given anime a distinct set of conventions .
Unlike Disney animation , where the emphasis is on the movement , anime emphasizes the art quality and let limited animation techniques make up for the lack of time spent on movement .
Such techniques are often used not only to meet deadlines but also as artistic devices .
Anime scenes place emphasis on achieving three-dimensional views , and backgrounds are instrumental in creating the atmosphere of the work .
The backgrounds are not always invented and are occasionally based on real locations , as exemplified in Howl 's Moving Castle and The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya .
Oppliger stated that anime is one of the rare mediums where putting together an all-star cast usually comes out looking `` tremendously impressive '' .
Physical exercise enhances or maintains physical fitness and overall health and wellness .
Nouns , verbs , pronouns and adjectives agree with each other in all respects .
However , non-human plural nouns are grammatically considered to be feminine singular .
Furthermore , a verb in a verb-initial sentence is marked as singular regardless of its semantic number when the subject of the verb is explicitly mentioned as a noun .
Numerals between three and ten show `` chiasmic '' agreement , in that grammatically masculine numerals have feminine marking and vice versa .
This is formed by adding the feminine suffix - ah onto nisba adjectives to form abstract nouns .
The most important sources of borrowings into -LRB- pre-Islamic -RRB- Arabic are from the related -LRB- Semitic -RRB- languages Aramaic , which used to be the principal , international language of communication throughout the ancient Near and Middle East , Ethiopic , and to a lesser degree Hebrew -LRB- mainly religious concepts -RRB- .
In addition , many cultural , religious and political terms have entered Arabic from Iranian languages , notably Middle Persian , Parthian , and -LRB- Classical -RRB- Persian , and Hellenistic Greek -LRB- kīmiyāʼ has as origin the Greek khymia , meaning in that language the melting of metals ; see Roger Dachez , Histoire de la Médecine de l'Antiquité au XXe siècle , Tallandier , 2008 , p. 251 -RRB- , alembic -LRB- distiller -RRB- from ambix -LRB- cup -RRB- , almanac -LRB- climate -RRB- from almenichiakon -LRB- calendar -RRB- .
Some Arabic borrowings from Semitic or Persian languages are , as presented in De Prémare 's above-cited book :
Levantine Arabic includes North Levantine Arabic , South Levantine Arabic and Cypriot Arabic .
But the consonant * / ʒ / is still found in many colloquial Arabic dialects .
Various other consonants have changed their sound too , but have remained distinct .
An original * / p / lenited to / f / , and * / ɡ / - consistently attested in pre-Islamic Greek transcription of Arabic languages - became palatalized to / ɡʲ / or / ɟ / by the time of the Quran and / d͡ʒ / , / ɡ / , / ʒ / or / ɟ / in MSA -LRB- see Arabic phonology #Local variations for more detail -RRB- .
Its emphatic counterpart / ɬˠ ~ ɮˤ / was considered by Arabs to be the most unusual sound in Arabic -LRB- Hence the Classical Arabic 's appellation لُغَةُ ٱلضَّادِ lughat al-ḍād or `` language of the ḍād '' -RRB- ; for most modern dialects , it has become an emphatic stop / dˤ / with loss of the laterality or with complete loss of any pharyngealization or velarization , / d / .
-LRB- The classical ḍād pronunciation of pharyngealization / ɮˤ / still occurs in the Mehri language and the similar sound without velarization , / ɮ / , exists in other Modern South Arabian languages . -RRB-
Early Akkadian transcriptions of Arabic names shows that this reduction had not yet occurred as of the early part of the 1st millennium BC .
/ θ / -LRB- ث -RRB- can be pronounced as -LSB- t -RSB- or even -LSB- s -RSB- .
Diseases may be classified by etiology -LRB- cause -RRB- , pathogenesis -LRB- mechanism by which the disease is caused -RRB- , or by symptom -LRB- s -RRB- .
Alternatively , diseases may be classified according to the organ system involved , though this is often complicated since many diseases affect more than one organ .
Most religions grant exceptions from religious duties to people who are sick .
For example , one whose life would be endangered by fasting on Yom Kippur or during Ramadan is exempted from the requirement , or even forbidden from participating .
People who are sick are also exempted from social duties .
For example , ill health is the only socially acceptable reason for an American to refuse an invitation to the White House .
Another class of metaphors describes the experience of illness as a journey : The person travels to or from a place of disease , and changes himself , discovers new information , or increases his experience along the way .
Some are explicitly immigration-themed : the patient has been exiled from the home territory of health to the land of the ill , changing identity and relationships in the process .
As medical science has advanced , many diseases whose causes were formerly complete mysteries have been somewhat explained -LRB- for example , when it was realized that autoimmunity is the cause of some forms of diabetes mellitus type 1 , even if we do not yet understand every molecular detail involved -RRB- or even extensively explained -LRB- for example , when it was realized that gastric ulcers are often associated with Helicobacter pylori infection -RRB- .
In 638 , after the conquest of Syria , Umar dismissed Khalid because of his ever-growing fame and influence .
The military conquests were partially terminated between 638 and 639 during the years of great famine in Arabia and plague in Levant .
During his reign the Levant , Egypt , Cyrenaica , Tripolitania , Fezzan , Eastern Anatolia , almost the whole of the Sassanid Persian Empire including Bactria , Persia , Azerbaijan , Armenia , Caucasus and Makran were annexed to the Rashidun Caliphate .
According to one estimate more than 4,050 cities were captured during these military conquests .
Prior to his death in 644 , Umar had ceased all military expeditions apparently to consolidate his rule in recently conquered Roman Egypt and the newly conquered Sassanid Empire -LRB- 642 -- 644 -RRB- .
At his death in November 644 , his rule extended from present day Libya in the west to the Indus river in the east and the Oxus river in the north .
Local populations of Jews and indigenous Christians , persecuted as religious minorities and taxed heavily to finance the Byzantine -- Sassanid Wars , often aided Muslims to take over their lands from the Byzantines and Persians , resulting in exceptionally speedy conquests .
As new areas joined the Islamic State , they also benefited from free trade , while trading with other areas in the Islamic State , so as to encourage commerce , in Islam trade is not taxed , wealth is taxed .
The Muslims paid zakat on their wealth to the poor .
Since the Constitution of Medina , was drafted by the Islamic prophet Muhammad , the Jews and the Christians continued to use their own laws in the Islamic State and had their own judges .
Therefore , they only paid for policing for the protection of their property .
To assist in the quick expansion of the state , the Byzantine and the Persian tax collection systems were maintained and the people paid a poll tax lower than the one imposed under the Byzantines and the Persians .
Umar became a merchant and made several journeys to Rome and Persia , where he is said to have met various scholars and analyzed Roman and Persian societies .
Most natural diamonds are formed at high temperature and pressure at depths of 140 to 190 kilometers -LRB- 87 to 118 mi -RRB- in the Earth 's mantle .
Carbon-containing minerals provide the carbon source , and the growth occurs over periods from 1 billion to 3.3 billion years -LRB- 25 % to 75 % of the age of the Earth -RRB- .
Diamonds are brought close to the Earth 's surface through deep volcanic eruptions by magma , which cools into igneous rocks known as kimberlites and lamproites .
Diamonds can also be produced synthetically in a HPHT method which approximately simulates the conditions in the Earth 's mantle .
Several non-diamond materials , which include cubic zirconia and silicon carbide and are often called diamond simulants , resemble diamond in appearance and many properties .
Special gemological techniques have been developed to distinguish natural diamonds , synthetic diamonds , and diamond simulants .
Industrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness , which makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools .
As the hardest known naturally occurring material , diamond can be used to polish , cut , or wear away any material , including other diamonds .
Common industrial applications of this property include diamond-tipped drill bits and saws , and the use of diamond powder as an abrasive .
Less expensive industrial-grade diamonds , known as bort , with more flaws and poorer color than gems , are used for such purposes .
Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds , as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high-speed machining , leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools compared to alternatives .
Roughly 49 % of diamonds originate from Central and Southern Africa , although significant sources of the mineral have been discovered in Canada , India , Russia , Brazil , and Australia .
They are mined from kimberlite and lamproite volcanic pipes , which can bring diamond crystals , originating from deep within the Earth where high pressures and temperatures enable them to form , to the surface .
The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses , and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world .
In 2005 , Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output , according to the British Geological Survey .
Australia boasts the richest diamantiferous pipe , with production from the Argyle diamond mine reaching peak levels of 42 metric tons per year in the 1990s .
There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada and Brazil .
Diamond prospectors continue to search the globe for diamond-bearing kimberlite and lamproite pipes .
Synthetic diamonds are diamonds manufactured in a laboratory , as opposed to diamonds mined from the Earth .
The gemological and industrial uses of diamond have created a large demand for rough stones .
This demand has been satisfied in large part by synthetic diamonds , which have been manufactured by various processes for more than half a century .
It is possible to make colorless synthetic gemstones that , on a molecular level , are identical to natural stones and so visually similar that only a gemologist with special equipment can tell the difference .
CVD diamonds can usually be identified by an orange fluorescence .
D-J colored diamonds can be screened through the Swiss Gemmological Institute 's Diamond Spotter .
Stones in the D-Z color range can be examined through the DiamondSure UV/visible spectrometer , a tool developed by De Beers .
Similarly , natural diamonds usually have minor imperfections and flaws , such as inclusions of foreign material , that are not seen in synthetic diamonds .
Darwin experienced an earthquake in Chile and saw signs that the land had just been raised , including mussel-beds stranded above high tide .
High in the Andes he saw seashells , and several fossil trees that had grown on a sand beach .
He theorised that as the land rose , oceanic islands sank , and coral reefs round them grew to form atolls .
Early in March , Darwin moved to London to be near this work , joining Lyell 's social circle of scientists and experts such as Charles Babbage , who described God as a programmer of laws .
Darwin stayed with his freethinking brother Erasmus , part of this Whig circle and a close friend of the writer Harriet Martineau , who promoted Malthusianism underlying the controversial Whig Poor Law reforms to stop welfare from causing overpopulation and more poverty .
As a Unitarian , she welcomed the radical implications of transmutation of species , promoted by Grant and younger surgeons influenced by Geoffroy .
Transmutation was anathema to Anglicans defending social order , but reputable scientists openly discussed the subject and there was wide interest in John Herschel 's letter praising Lyell 's approach as a way to find a natural cause of the origin of new species .
Used to jotting down daily notes on animal breeding , he scrawled rambling thoughts about career and prospects on two scraps of paper , one with columns headed `` Marry '' and `` Not Marry '' .
Advantages included `` constant companion and a friend in old age ... better than a dog anyhow '' , against points such as `` less money for books '' and `` terrible loss of time . ''
Having decided in favour , he discussed it with his father , then went to visit Emma on 29 July .
`` Evolutionism '' at that time was associated with other concepts , most commonly with embryological development , and Darwin first used the word evolution in The Descent of Man in 1871 , before adding it in 1872 to the 6th edition of The Origin of Species .
A seated statue of Darwin , unveiled 1897 , stands in front of Shrewsbury Library , the building that used to house Shrewsbury School , which Darwin attended as a boy .
Another statue of Darwin as a young man is situated in the grounds of Christ 's College , Cambridge .
He learned John Herschel 's science which , like William Paley 's natural theology , sought explanations in laws of nature rather than miracles and saw adaptation of species as evidence of design .
On board the Beagle , Darwin was quite orthodox and would quote the Bible as an authority on morality .
In Florence , Baldo d'Aguglione pardoned most of the White Guelphs in exile and allowed them to return .
However , Dante had gone too far in his violent letters to Arrigo -LRB- Henry VII -RRB- and his sentence was not revoked .
In the late Middle Ages , the overwhelming majority of poetry was written in Latin , and therefore accessible only to affluent and educated audiences .
In De vulgari eloquentia -LRB- On Eloquence in the Vernacular -RRB- , however , Dante defended use of the vernacular in literature .
He himself would even write in the Tuscan dialect for works such as The New Life -LRB- 1295 -RRB- and the aforementioned Divine Comedy ; this choice , although highly unorthodox , set a hugely important precedent that later Italian writers such as Petrarch and Boccaccio would follow .
As a result , Dante played an instrumental role in establishing the national language of Italy .
Dante 's significance also extends past his home country ; his depictions of Hell , Purgatory , and Heaven have provided inspiration for a large body of Western art , and are cited as an influence on the works of John Milton , Geoffrey Chaucer and Alfred Tennyson , among many others .
In addition , the first use of the interlocking three-line rhyme scheme , or the terza rima , is attributed to him .
Alighieri accepted Prince Guido Novello da Polenta 's invitation to Ravenna in 1318 .
He finished Paradiso , and died in 1321 -LRB- aged 56 -RRB- while returning to Ravenna from a diplomatic mission to Venice , possibly of malaria contracted there .
Joule was tutored as a young man by the famous scientist John Dalton and was strongly influenced by chemist William Henry and Manchester engineers Peter Ewart and Eaton Hodgkinson .
He was fascinated by electricity , and he and his brother experimented by giving electric shocks to each other and to the family 's servants .
Motivated in part by a businessman 's desire to quantify the economics of the choice , and in part by his scientific inquisitiveness , he set out to determine which prime mover was more efficient .
He discovered Joule 's first law in 1841 , that the heat which is evolved by the proper action of any voltaic current is proportional to the square of the intensity of that current , multiplied by the resistance to conduction which it experiences .
He went on to realize that burning a pound of coal in a steam engine was more economical than a costly pound of zinc consumed in an electric battery .
Joule captured the output of the alternative methods in terms of a common standard , the ability to raise one pound , a height of one foot , the foot-pound .
Selye proposed a unified non-specific approach to many causes of death .
He demonstrated that stress decreases adaptability of an organism and proposed to describe the adaptability as a special resource , adaptation energy .
The animal dies when this resource is exhausted .
Selye assumed that the adaptability is a finite supply , presented at birth .
Later on , Goldstone proposed the concept of a production or income of adaptation energy which may be stored -LRB- up to a limit -RRB- , as a capital reserve of adaptation .
In recent works , adaptation energy is considered as an internal coordinate on the `` dominant path '' in the model of adaptation .
It is demonstrated that oscillations of well-being appear when the reserve of adaptability is almost exhausted .
In most jurisdictions where capital punishment is carried out today , the death penalty is reserved for premeditated murder , espionage , treason , or as part of military justice .
In some countries , sexual crimes , such as adultery and sodomy , carry the death penalty , as do religious crimes such as apostasy , the formal renunciation of one 's religion .
In China , human trafficking and serious cases of corruption are also punished by the death penalty .
In militaries around the world courts-martial have imposed death sentences for offenses such as cowardice , desertion , insubordination , and mutiny .
Organisms showing only asexual reproduction -LRB- e.g. bacteria , some protists , like the euglenoids and many amoebozoans -RRB- and unicellular organisms with sexual reproduction -LRB- colonial or not , like the volvocine algae Pandorina and Chlamydomonas -RRB- are `` immortal '' at some extent , dying only due to external hazards , like being eaten or meeting with a fatal accident .
In multicellular organisms -LRB- and also in multinucleate ciliates -RRB- , with a Weismannist development , that is , with a division of labor between mortal somatic -LRB- body -RRB- cells and `` immortal '' germ -LRB- reproductive -RRB- cells , death becomes an essential part of life , at least for the somatic line .
Almost all animals who survive external hazards to their biological functioning eventually die from biological aging , known in life sciences as `` senescence '' .
Some organisms experience negligible senescence , even exhibiting biological immortality .
These include the jellyfish Turritopsis dohrnii , the hydra , and the planarian .
Unnatural causes of death include suicide and homicide .
From all causes , roughly 150,000 people die around the world each day .
Of these , two thirds die directly or indirectly due to senescence , but in industrialized countries -- such as the United States , the United Kingdom , and Germany -- the rate approaches 90 % , i.e. , nearly nine out of ten of all deaths are related to senescence .
As a point in time , death would seem to refer to the moment at which life ends .
Determining when death has occurred requires drawing precise conceptual boundaries between life and death .
This general problem applies to the particular challenge of defining death in the context of medicine .
Since they are even , they can be written as x = 2a and y = 2b , respectively , for integers a and b .
In proof by mathematical induction , a single `` base case '' is proved , and an `` induction rule '' is proved that establishes that any arbitrary case implies the next case .
Since in principle the induction rule can be applied repeatedly starting from the proved base case , we see that all -LRB- usually infinitely many -RRB- cases are provable .
This avoids having to prove each case individually .
A variant of mathematical induction is proof by infinite descent , which can be used , for example , to prove the irrationality of the square root of two .
Sometimes , the abbreviation `` Q.E.D. '' is written to indicate the end of a proof .
This abbreviation stands for `` Quod Erat Demonstrandum '' , which is Latin for `` that which was to be demonstrated '' .
Further advances took place in medieval Islamic mathematics .
While earlier Greek proofs were largely geometric demonstrations , the development of arithmetic and algebra by Islamic mathematicians allowed more general proofs that no longer depended on geometry .
In the 10th century CE , the Iraqi mathematician Al-Hashimi provided general proofs for numbers -LRB- rather than geometric demonstrations -RRB- as he considered multiplication , division , etc. for `` lines . ''
He used this method to provide a proof of the existence of irrational numbers .
An inductive proof for arithmetic sequences was introduced in the Al-Fakhri -LRB- 1000 -RRB- by Al-Karaji , who used it to prove the binomial theorem and properties of Pascal 's triangle .
Alhazen also developed the method of proof by contradiction , as the first attempt at proving the Euclidean parallel postulate .
Modern proof theory treats proofs as inductively defined data structures .
There is no longer an assumption that axioms are `` true '' in any sense ; this allows for parallel mathematical theories built on alternate sets of axioms -LRB- see Axiomatic set theory and Non-Euclidean geometry for examples -RRB- .
The primary rotating flow in a tropical cyclone results from the conservation of angular momentum by the secondary circulation .
The first component corresponds to sensible heat and the second to latent heat .
The RSMCs and TCWCs are not the only organizations that provide information about tropical cyclones to the public .
The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration -LRB- PAGASA -RRB- issues advisories and names for tropical cyclones that approach the Philippines in the Northwestern Pacific to protect the life and property of its citizens .
The Canadian Hurricane Center -LRB- CHC -RRB- issues advisories on hurricanes and their remnants for Canadian citizens when they affect Canada .
Worldwide , tropical cyclone activity peaks in late summer , when the difference between temperatures aloft and sea surface temperatures is the greatest .
Intense tropical cyclones pose a particular observation challenge , as they are a dangerous oceanic phenomenon , and weather stations , being relatively sparse , are rarely available on the site of the storm itself .
In general , surface observations are available only if the storm is passing over an island or a coastal area , or if there is a nearby ship .
Real-time measurements are usually taken in the periphery of the cyclone , where conditions are less catastrophic and its true strength can not be evaluated .
For this reason , there are teams of meteorologists that move into the path of tropical cyclones to help evaluate their strength at the point of landfall .
Tropical cyclones that cause extreme destruction are rare , although when they occur , they can cause great amounts of damage or thousands of fatalities .
The 1970 Bhola cyclone is the deadliest tropical cyclone on record , killing more than 300,000 people and potentially as many as 1 million after striking the densely populated Ganges Delta region of Bangladesh on November 13 , 1970 .
Elsewhere , Typhoon Nina killed nearly 100,000 in China in 1975 due to a 100-year flood that caused 62 dams including the Banqiao Dam to fail .
The Great Hurricane of 1780 is the deadliest North Atlantic hurricane on record , killing about 22,000 people in the Lesser Antilles .
A tropical cyclone does not need to be particularly strong to cause memorable damage , primarily if the deaths are from rainfall or mudslides .
Tropical Storm Thelma in November 1991 killed thousands in the Philippines , although the strongest typhoon to ever make landfall on record was Typhoon Haiyan on November 2013 , causing widespread devastation in the Eastern Visayas and killing at least 6,300 people in that country alone .
In 1982 , the unnamed tropical depression that eventually became Hurricane Paul killed around 1,000 people in Central America .
The interior chamber of the Taj Mahal reaches far beyond traditional decorative elements .
The interior walls are about 25 metres -LRB- 82 ft -RRB- high and are topped by a `` false '' interior dome decorated with a sun motif .
Eight pishtaq arches define the space at ground level and , as with the exterior , each lower pishtaq is crowned by a second pishtaq about midway up the wall .
The four central upper arches form balconies or viewing areas , and each balcony 's exterior window has an intricate screen or jali cut from marble .
In addition to the light from the balcony screens , light enters through roof openings covered by chattris at the corners .
The octagonal marble screen or jali bordering the cenotaphs is made from eight marble panels carved through with intricate pierce work .
The remaining surfaces are inlaid in delicate detail with semi-precious stones forming twining vines , fruits and flowers .
Each chamber wall is highly decorated with dado bas-relief , intricate lapidary inlay and refined calligraphy panels which reflect , in miniature detail , the design elements seen throughout the exterior of the complex .
Construction of the mausoleum was essentially completed in 1643 but work continued on other phases of the project for another 10 years .
The Taj Mahal complex is believed to have been completed in its entirety in 1653 at a cost estimated at the time to be around 32 million rupees , which in 2015 would be approximately 52.8 billion rupees -LRB- US$ 827 million -RRB- .
The construction project employed some 20,000 artisans under the guidance of a board of architects led by the court architect to the emperor , Ustad Ahmad Lahauri .
According to the legend , Shah Jahan decreed that anyone could keep the bricks taken from the scaffold , and thus it was dismantled by peasants overnight .
A 15-kilometre -LRB- 9.3 mi -RRB- tamped-earth ramp was built to transport marble and materials to the construction site and teams of twenty or thirty oxen pulled the blocks on specially constructed wagons .
An elaborate post-and-beam pulley system was used to raise the blocks into desired position .
Water was drawn from the river by a series of purs , an animal-powered rope and bucket mechanism , into a large storage tank and raised to a large distribution tank .
In 1942 , the government erected a scaffolding to disguise the building in anticipation of air attacks by the Japanese Air Force .
During the India-Pakistan wars of 1965 and 1971 , scaffolding were again erected to mislead bomber pilots .
It is a large , white marble structure standing on a square plinth and consists of a symmetrical building with an iwan -LRB- an arch-shaped doorway -RRB- topped by a large dome and finial .
In an account that had become standard by the mid-century , Hilbert 's problem set was also a kind of manifesto , that opened the way for the development of the formalist school , one of three major schools of mathematics of the 20th century .
When planning a visit from Bonn , where he was immersed in studying physics , his fellow mathematician and friend Hermann Minkowski joked he had to spend 10 days in quarantine before being able to visit Hilbert .
In fact , Minkowski seems responsible for most of Hilbert 's physics investigations prior to 1912 , including their joint seminar in the subject in 1905 .
The Cretaceous -- Paleogene extinction event , which occurred approximately 66 million years ago at the end of the Cretaceous period , caused the extinction of all dinosaur groups except for the neornithine birds .
Some other diapsid groups , such as crocodilians , sebecosuchians , turtles , lizards , snakes , sphenodontians , and choristoderans , also survived the event .
From a behavioral standpoint , one of the most valuable dinosaur fossils was discovered in the Gobi Desert in 1971 .
It included a Velociraptor attacking a Protoceratops , providing evidence that dinosaurs did indeed attack each other .
Additional evidence for attacking live prey is the partially healed tail of an Edmontosaurus , a hadrosaurid dinosaur ; the tail is damaged in such a way that shows the animal was bitten by a tyrannosaur but survived .
Cannibalism amongst some species of dinosaurs was confirmed by tooth marks found in Madagascar in 2003 , involving the theropod Majungasaurus .
In the years when the Deccan Traps theory was linked to a slower extinction , Luis Alvarez -LRB- who died in 1988 -RRB- replied that paleontologists were being misled by sparse data .
While his assertion was not initially well-received , later intensive field studies of fossil beds lent weight to his claim .
Eventually , most paleontologists began to accept the idea that the mass extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous were largely or at least partly due to a massive Earth impact .
However , even Walter Alvarez has acknowledged that there were other major changes on Earth even before the impact , such as a drop in sea level and massive volcanic eruptions that produced the Indian Deccan Traps , and these may have contributed to the extinctions .
The study of these `` great fossil lizards '' soon became of great interest to European and American scientists , and in 1842 the English paleontologist Richard Owen coined the term `` dinosaur '' .
He recognized that the remains that had been found so far , Iguanodon , Megalosaurus and Hylaeosaurus , shared a number of distinctive features , and so decided to present them as a distinct taxonomic group .
With the backing of Prince Albert , the husband of Queen Victoria , Owen established the Natural History Museum , London , to display the national collection of dinosaur fossils and other biological and geological exhibits .
In 1858 , William Parker Foulke discovered the first known American dinosaur , in marl pits in the small town of Haddonfield , New Jersey .
-LRB- Although fossils had been found before , their nature had not been correctly discerned . -RRB-
The creature was named Hadrosaurus foulkii .
It was an extremely important find : Hadrosaurus was one of the first nearly complete dinosaur skeletons found -LRB- the first was in 1834 , in Maidstone , England -RRB- , and it was clearly a bipedal creature .
This was a revolutionary discovery as , until that point , most scientists had believed dinosaurs walked on four feet , like other lizards .
Foulke 's discoveries sparked a wave of dinosaur mania in the United States .
In 2009 , a team including Schweitzer announced that , using even more careful methodology , they had duplicated their results by finding similar soft tissue in a duck-billed dinosaur , Brachylophosaurus canadensis , found in the Judith River Formation of Montana .
This included even more detailed tissue , down to preserved bone cells that seem even to have visible remnants of nuclei and what seem to be red blood cells .
Among other materials found in the bone was collagen , as in the Tyrannosaurus bone .
The type of collagen an animal has in its bones varies according to its DNA and , in both cases , this collagen was of the same type found in modern chickens and ostriches .
The extraction of ancient DNA from dinosaur fossils has been reported on two separate occasions ; upon further inspection and peer review , however , neither of these reports could be confirmed .
However , a functional peptide involved in the vision of a theoretical dinosaur has been inferred using analytical phylogenetic reconstruction methods on gene sequences of related modern species such as reptiles and birds .
In addition , several proteins , including hemoglobin , have putatively been detected in dinosaur fossils .
Amsterdam is one of the most bicycle-friendly large cities in the world and is a centre of bicycle culture with good facilities for cyclists such as bike paths and bike racks , and several guarded bike storage garages -LRB- fietsenstalling -RRB- which can be used for a nominal fee .
In 2013 , there were about 1,200,000 bicycles in Amsterdam outnumbering the amount of citizens in the city .
Theft is widespread -- in 2011 , about 83,000 bicycles were stolen in Amsterdam .
Bicycles are used by all socio-economic groups because of their convenience , Amsterdam 's small size , the 400 kilometres -LRB- 249 miles -RRB- of bike paths , the flat terrain , and the arguable inconvenience of driving an automobile .
Many new suburbs , such as Osdorp , Slotervaart , Slotermeer and Geuzenveld , were built in the years after the Second World War .
These suburbs contained many public parks and wide open spaces , and the new buildings provided improved housing conditions with larger and brighter rooms , gardens , and balconies .
Because of the war and other events of the 20th century , almost the entire city centre had fallen into disrepair .
As society was changing , politicians and other influential figures made plans to redesign large parts of it .
There was an increasing demand for office buildings , and also for new roads , as the automobile became available to most people .
A metro started operating in 1977 between the new suburb of Bijlmer and the centre of Amsterdam .
Further plans were to build a new highway above the metro to connect the Central Station and city centre with other parts of the city .
The river Amstel ends in the city centre and connects to a large number of canals that eventually terminate in the IJ .
The surrounding land is flat as it is formed of large polders .
Amsterdam is connected to the North Sea through the long North Sea Canal .
The first is the area surrounding Amsterdam Sloterdijk railway station , where several newspapers like De Telegraaf have their offices .
The second Financial District is the area surrounding Amsterdam Arena .
The third is the area surrounding Amsterdam Amstel railway station .
The tallest building in Amsterdam , the Rembrandt Tower , is situated there , as is the headquarters of Philips .
Shops in Amsterdam range from large high end department stores such as De Bijenkorf founded in 1870 to small specialty shops .
Amsterdam 's high-end shops are found in the streets P.C. Hooftstraat and Cornelis Schuytstraat , which are located in the vicinity of the Vondelpark .
Other shopping areas include the Negen Straatjes and Haarlemmerdijk and Haarlemmerstraat .
The Negen Straatjes differ from other shopping districts with the presence of a large diversity of privately owned shops .
The Haarlemmerstraat and Haarlemmerdijk were voted best shopping street in the Netherlands in 2011 .
These streets have as the Negen Straatjes a large diversity of privately owned shops .
But as the Negen Straatjes are dominated by fashion stores the Haarlemmerstraat and Haarlemmerdijk offer a very wide variety of all kinds of stores , just to name some specialties : candy and other food related stores , lingerie , sneakers , wedding clothing , interior shops , books , Italian deli 's , racing and mountain bikes , skatewear , etc. .
The Rijksmuseum possesses the largest and most important collection of classical Dutch art .
The full collection was reopened to the public on 13 April 2013 and the Rijksmuseum has established itself as the most visited museum in Amsterdam with 2.2 million visitors in 2013 .
Its collection consists of nearly one million objects .
The artist most associated with Amsterdam is Rembrandt , whose work , and the work of his pupils , is displayed in the Rijksmuseum .
Aside from paintings , the collection consists of a large variety of decorative art .
This ranges from Delftware to giant doll-houses from the 17th century .
The museum underwent a 10-year , 375 million euro renovation starting in 2003 .
Its concerts perform mostly modern classical music .
Located adjacent to it , is the Bimhuis , a concert hall for improvised and Jazz music .
The building contains three halls , Grote Zaal , Kleine Zaal , and Spiegelzaal .
Some nine hundred concerts and other events per year take place in the Concertgebouw , for a public of over 700,000 , making it one of the most-visited concert halls in the world .
The opera house of Amsterdam is situated adjacent to the city hall .
Therefore , the two buildings combined are often called the Stopera , -LRB- a word originally coined by protesters against it very construction : Stop the Opera -LSB- - house -RSB- -RRB- .
This huge modern complex , opened in 1986 , lies in the former Jewish neighbourhood at Waterlooplein next to the river Amstel .
Muziekgebouw aan ' t IJ is a concert hall , which is situated in the IJ near the central station .
Boxer Raymond Joval and field hockey midfielder Carole Thate were the first to receive the awards , in 1999 .
Statistics Netherlands uses three other definitions of Amsterdam : metropolitan agglomeration Amsterdam -LRB- Grootstedelijke Agglomeratie Amsterdam , not to be confused with Grootstedelijk Gebied Amsterdam , a synonym of Groot Amsterdam -RRB- , Greater Amsterdam -LRB- Groot Amsterdam , a COROP region -RRB- and the urban region Amsterdam -LRB- Stadsgewest Amsterdam -RRB- .
The Amsterdam Department for Research and Statistics uses a fourth conurbation , namely the Stadsregio Amsterdam -LRB- ` City Region of Amsterdam ' -RRB- .
The city region is similar to Greater Amsterdam but includes the municipalities of Zaanstad and Wormerland .
An aircraft is a machine that is able to fly by gaining support from the air .
It counters the force of gravity by using either static lift or by using the dynamic lift of an airfoil , or in a few cases the downward thrust from jet engines .
Rotorcraft , or rotary-wing aircraft , use a spinning rotor with aerofoil section blades -LRB- a rotary wing -RRB- to provide lift .
Types include helicopters , autogyros , and various hybrids such as gyrodynes and compound rotorcraft .
Helicopters have a rotor turned by an engine-driven shaft .
The rotor pushes air downward to create lift .
By tilting the rotor forward , the downward flow is tilted backward , producing thrust for forward flight .
Some helicopters have more than one rotor and a few have rotors turned by gas jets at the tips .
Flying model craft and stories of manned flight go back many centuries , however the first manned ascent -- and safe descent -- in modern times took place by larger hot-air balloons developed in the 18th century .
Each of the two World Wars led to great technical advances .
Consequently , the history of aircraft can be divided into five eras :
Many kinds of power plant have been used to drive propellers .
The more practical internal combustion piston engine was used for virtually all fixed-wing aircraft until World War II and is still used in many smaller aircraft .
Some types use turbine engines to drive a propeller in the form of a turboprop or propfan .
Human-powered flight has been achieved , but has not become a practical means of transport .
Unmanned aircraft and models have also used power sources such as electric motors and rubber bands .
Aerostats use buoyancy to float in the air in much the same way that ships float on the water .
They are characterized by one or more large gasbags or canopies , filled with a relatively low-density gas such as helium , hydrogen , or hot air , which is less dense than the surrounding air .
When the weight of this is added to the weight of the aircraft structure , it adds up to the same weight as the air that the craft displaces .
Heavier-than-air types are characterised by one or more wings and a central fuselage .
The fuselage typically also carries a tail or empennage for stability and control , and an undercarriage for takeoff and landing .
Engines may be located on the fuselage or wings .
On a fixed-wing aircraft the wings are rigidly attached to the fuselage , while on a rotorcraft the wings are attached to a rotating vertical shaft .
Smaller designs sometimes use flexible materials for part or all of the structure , held in place either by a rigid frame or by air pressure .
The fixed parts of the structure comprise the airframe .
Pitch and yaw stabilities of conventional fixed wing designs require horizontal and vertical stabilisers , which act similarly to the feathers on an arrow .
These stabilizing surfaces allow equilibrium of aerodynamic forces and to stabilise the flight dynamics of pitch and yaw .
They are usually mounted on the tail section -LRB- empennage -RRB- , although in the canard layout , the main aft wing replaces the canard foreplane as pitch stabilizer .
Tandem wing and Tailless aircraft rely on the same general rule to achieve stability , the aft surface being the stabilising one .
Gastroenteritis , also known as infectious diarrhea , is inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract that involves the stomach and small intestine .
Signs and symptoms include some combination of diarrhea , vomiting , and abdominal pain .
This typically lasts less than two weeks .
It is unrelated to influenza though it has been called the stomach flu .
Some probiotics have been shown to be beneficial in reducing both the duration of illness and the frequency of stools .
They may also be useful in preventing and treating antibiotic associated diarrhea .
Zinc supplementation appears to be effective in both treating and preventing diarrhea among children in the developing world .
Norovirus is the leading cause of gastroenteritis among adults in America , causing greater than 90 % of outbreaks .
These localized epidemics typically occur when groups of people spend time in close physical proximity to each other , such as on cruise ships , in hospitals , or in restaurants .
People may remain infectious even after their diarrhea has ended .
Regarded as one of the most important and influential filmmakers in the history of cinema , Kurosawa directed 30 films in a career spanning 57 years .
Kurosawa entered the Japanese film industry in 1936 , following a brief stint as a painter .
After years of working on numerous films as an assistant director and scriptwriter , he made his debut as a director in 1943 , during World War II , with the popular action film Sanshiro Sugata -LRB- a.k.a. Judo Saga -RRB- .
After the war , the critically acclaimed Drunken Angel -LRB- 1948 -RRB- , in which Kurosawa cast then-unknown actor Toshiro Mifune in a starring role , cemented the director 's reputation as one of the most important young filmmakers in Japan .
The two men would go on to collaborate on another 15 films .
The director meanwhile had become involved in a much more ambitious Hollywood project .
He struggled to work with an unfamiliar crew and the requirements of a Hollywood production , while his working methods puzzled his American producers , who ultimately concluded that the director must be mentally ill .
On Christmas Eve 1968 , the Americans announced that Kurosawa had left the production due to `` fatigue '' , effectively firing him .
, produced by 20th Century Fox and Kurosawa Production , would be a portrayal of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor from both the American and the Japanese points-of-view , with Kurosawa helming the Japanese half and an English-speaking filmmaker directing the American half .
He spent several months working on the script with Ryuzo Kikushima and Hideo Oguni , but very soon the project began to unravel .
The director chosen to film the American sequences turned out not to be the prestigious English filmmaker David Lean , as the producers had led Kurosawa to believe , but the much less celebrated special effects expert , Richard Fleischer .
The budget was also cut , and the screen time allocated for the Japanese segment would now be no longer than 90 minutes -- a major problem , considering that Kurosawa 's script ran over four hours .
After numerous revisions , a more or less finalized cut screenplay was agreed upon in May 1968 .
Shooting began in early December , but Kurosawa would last only a little over three weeks as director .
The director 's frequent crew member Teruyo Nogami confirms this view .
She claimed that Kurosawa carried in his head all the information about all shots filmed , and if , in the editing room , he asked for a piece of film and she handed him the wrong one , he would immediately recognize the error , though she had taken detailed notes on each shot and he had not .
Heigo was academically gifted , but soon after failing to secure a place in Tokyo 's foremost high school , he began to detach himself from the rest of the family , preferring to concentrate on his interest in foreign literature .
In the late 1920s , Heigo became a benshi -LRB- silent film narrator -RRB- for Tokyo theaters showing foreign films , and quickly made a name for himself .
Akira , who at this point planned to become a painter , moved in with him , and the two brothers became inseparable .
Through Heigo , Akira devoured not only films but also theater and circus performances , while exhibiting his paintings and working for the left-wing Proletarian Artists ' League .
However , he was never able to make a living with his art , and , as he began to perceive most of the proletarian movement as `` putting unfulfilled political ideals directly onto the canvas '' , he lost his enthusiasm for painting .
In his films of the 1940s and 1950s , Kurosawa frequently employs the `` axial cut '' , in which the camera moves closer to , or further away from , the subject , not through the use of tracking shots or dissolves , but through a series of matched jump cuts .
For example , in Sanshiro Sugata II , the hero takes leave of the woman he loves , but then , after walking away a short distance , turns and bows to her , and then , after walking further , turns and bows once more .
This sequence of shots is illustrated on film scholar David Bordwell 's blog .
The three shots are not connected in the film by camera movements or dissolves , but by a series of two jump cuts .
The effect is to stress the duration of Sanshiro 's departure .
Egypt reached the pinnacle of its power in the New Kingdom , during the Ramesside period , where it rivalled the Hittite Empire , Assyrian Empire and Mitanni Empire , after which it entered a period of slow decline .
Egypt was invaded or conquered by a succession of foreign powers , such as the Canaanites/Hyksos , Libyans , the Nubians , the Assyrians , Babylonians , the Achaemenid Persians , and the Macedonians in the Third Intermediate Period and the Late Period of Egypt .
In the aftermath of Alexander the Great 's death , one of his generals , Ptolemy Soter , established himself as the new ruler of Egypt .
This Greek Ptolemaic Kingdom ruled Egypt until 30 BC , when , under Cleopatra , it fell to the Roman Empire and became a Roman province .
In 332 BC , Alexander the Great conquered Egypt with little resistance from the Persians and was welcomed by the Egyptians as a deliverer .
The administration established by Alexander 's successors , the Macedonian Ptolemaic Kingdom , was based on an Egyptian model and based in the new capital city of Alexandria .
The city showcased the power and prestige of Hellenistic rule , and became a seat of learning and culture , centered at the famous Library of Alexandria .
The Lighthouse of Alexandria lit the way for the many ships that kept trade flowing through the city -- as the Ptolemies made commerce and revenue-generating enterprises , such as papyrus manufacturing , their top priority .
The ancient Egyptians viewed men and women , including people from all social classes except slaves , as essentially equal under the law , and even the lowliest peasant was entitled to petition the vizier and his court for redress .
Although , slaves were mostly used as indentured servants .
Both men and women had the right to own and sell property , make contracts , marry and divorce , receive inheritance , and pursue legal disputes in court .
Married couples could own property jointly and protect themselves from divorce by agreeing to marriage contracts , which stipulated the financial obligations of the husband to his wife and children should the marriage end .
Women such as Hatshepsut and Cleopatra VII even became pharaohs , while others wielded power as Divine Wives of Amun .
The ancient Egyptians enjoyed a variety of leisure activities , including games and music .
Senet , a board game where pieces moved according to random chance , was particularly popular from the earliest times ; another similar game was mehen , which had a circular gaming board .
Juggling and ball games were popular with children , and wrestling is also documented in a tomb at Beni Hasan .
The wealthy members of ancient Egyptian society enjoyed hunting and boating as well .
The city would gain pre-eminence in southern Syria when Ezron , the claimant to Aram-Zobah 's throne who was denied kingship of the federation , fled Beqaa and captured Damascus by force in 965 BC .
Ezron overthrew the city 's tribal governor and founded the independent entity of Aram-Damascus .
As this new state expanded south , it prevented the Kingdom of Israel from spreading north and the two kingdoms soon clashed as they both sought to dominate trading hegemony in the east .
Under Ezron 's grandson , Ben-Hadad I -LRB- 880 -- 841 BC -RRB- , and his successor Hazael , Damascus annexed Bashan -LRB- modern-day Hauran region -RRB- , and went on the offensive with Israel .
This conflict continued until the early 8th century BC when Ben-Hadad II was captured by Israel after unsuccessfully besieging Samaria .
In 64 BC , the Roman general Pompey annexed the western part of Syria .
The Romans occupied Damascus and subsequently incorporated it into the league of ten cities known as the Decapolis which themselves were incorporated into the province of Syria and granted autonomy .
The Damascus stock exchange formally opened for trade in March 2009 , and the exchange is the only stock exchange in Syria .
The station is now defunct and the tracks have been removed , but there still is a ticket counter and a shuttle to Damacus Kadam station in the south of the city , which now functions as the main railway station .
In the 20th century , newer suburbs developed north of the Barada , and to some extent to the south , invading the Ghouta oasis .
In 1956 -- 1957 the new neighbourhood of Yarmouk became a second home to thousands of Palestinian refugees .
City planners preferred to preserve the Ghouta as far as possible , and in the later 20th century some of the main areas of development were to the north , in the western Mezzeh neighbourhood and most recently along the Barada valley in Dummar in the north west and on the slopes of the mountains at Berze in the north-east .
Poorer areas , often built without official approval , have mostly developed south of the main city .
In economics , money is a broad term that refers to any financial instrument that can fulfill the functions of money -LRB- detailed above -RRB- .
These financial instruments together are collectively referred to as the money supply of an economy .
Since the money supply consists of various financial instruments -LRB- usually currency , demand deposits and various other types of deposits -RRB- , the amount of money in an economy is measured by adding together these financial instruments creating a monetary aggregate .
In Europe , paper money was first introduced in Sweden in 1661 .
Sweden was rich in copper , thus , because of copper 's low value , extraordinarily big coins -LRB- often weighing several kilograms -RRB- had to be made .
The advantages of paper currency were numerous : it reduced transport of gold and silver , and thus lowered the risks ; it made loaning gold or silver at interest easier , since the specie -LRB- gold or silver -RRB- never left the possession of the lender until someone else redeemed the note ; and it allowed for a division of currency into credit and specie backed forms .
At this time both silver and gold were considered legal tender , and accepted by governments for taxes .
However , the instability in the ratio between the two grew over the course of the 19th century , with the increase both in supply of these metals , particularly silver , and of trade .
This is called bimetallism and the attempt to create a bimetallic standard where both gold and silver backed currency remained in circulation occupied the efforts of inflationists .
Governments at this point could use currency as an instrument of policy , printing paper currency such as the United States Greenback , to pay for military expenditures .
A failed monetary policy can have significant detrimental effects on an economy and the society that depends on it .
These include hyperinflation , stagflation , recession , high unemployment , shortages of imported goods , inability to export goods , and even total monetary collapse and the adoption of a much less efficient barter economy .
This happened in Russia , for instance , after the fall of the Soviet Union .
Governments and central banks have taken both regulatory and free market approaches to monetary policy .
Some of the tools used to control the money supply include :
In Money and the Mechanism of Exchange -LRB- 1875 -RRB- , William Stanley Jevons famously analyzed money in terms of four functions : a medium of exchange , a common measure of value -LRB- or unit of account -RRB- , a standard of value -LRB- or standard of deferred payment -RRB- , and a store of value .
By 1919 , Jevons 's four functions of money were summarized in the couplet :
Gram-positive bacteria possess a thick cell wall containing many layers of peptidoglycan and teichoic acids .
In contrast , gram-negative bacteria have a relatively thin cell wall consisting of a few layers of peptidoglycan surrounded by a second lipid membrane containing lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins .
Lipopolysaccharides , also called endotoxins , are composed of polysaccharides and lipid A that is responsible for much of the toxicity of gram-negative bacteria .
These two groups were previously known as the low G+C and high G+C gram-positive bacteria , respectively .
These differences in structure can produce differences in antibiotic susceptibility ; for instance , vancomycin can kill only gram-positive bacteria and is ineffective against gram-negative pathogens , such as Haemophilus influenzae or Pseudomonas aeruginosa .
If the bacterial cell wall is entirely removed , it is called a protoplast , whereas if it is partially removed , it is called a spheroplast .
β-Lactam antibiotics , such as penicillin , inhibit the formation of peptidoglycan cross-links in the bacterial cell wall .
The enzyme lysozyme , found in human tears , also digests the cell wall of bacteria and is the body 's main defence against eye infections .
There are approximately 5 × 1030 bacteria on Earth , forming a biomass which exceeds that of all plants and animals .
The nutrient cycle includes the decomposition of dead bodies and bacteria are responsible for the putrefaction stage in this process .
In the biological communities surrounding hydrothermal vents and cold seeps , extremophile bacteria provide the nutrients needed to sustain life by converting dissolved compounds , such as hydrogen sulphide and methane , to energy .
In March 2013 , data reported by researchers in October 2012 , was published .
It was suggested that bacteria thrive in the Mariana Trench , which with a depth of up to 11 kilometres is the deepest known part of the oceans .
Other researchers reported related studies that microbes thrive inside rocks up to 580 metres below the sea floor under 2.6 kilometres of ocean off the coast of the northwestern United States .
According to one of the researchers , `` You can find microbes everywhere -- they 're extremely adaptable to conditions , and survive wherever they are . ''
Most bacterial species are either spherical , called cocci -LRB- sing .
Some bacteria , called vibrio , are shaped like slightly curved rods or comma-shaped ; others can be spiral-shaped , called spirilla , or tightly coiled , called spirochaetes .
More recently , some bacteria were discovered deep under Earth 's crust that grow as branching filamentous types with a star-shaped cross-section .
The large surface area to volume ratio of this morphology may give these bacteria an advantage in nutrient-poor environments .
This wide variety of shapes is determined by the bacterial cell wall and cytoskeleton , and is important because it can influence the ability of bacteria to acquire nutrients , attach to surfaces , swim through liquids and escape predators .
Every atom is composed of a nucleus and one or more electrons bound to the nucleus .
The nucleus is made of one or more protons and typically a similar number of neutrons .
Protons and neutrons are called nucleons .
If an atom has more or fewer electrons than protons , then it has an overall negative or positive charge , respectively , and it is called an ion .
Stability of isotopes is affected by the ratio of protons to neutrons , and also by the presence of certain `` magic numbers '' of neutrons or protons that represent closed and filled quantum shells .
Most odd -- odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay , because the decay products are even -- even , and are therefore more strongly bound , due to nuclear pairing effects .
As even the most massive atoms are far too light to work with directly , chemists instead use the unit of moles .
This number was chosen so that if an element has an atomic mass of 1 u , a mole of atoms of that element has a mass close to one gram .
Because of the definition of the unified atomic mass unit , each carbon-12 atom has an atomic mass of exactly 12 u , and so a mole of carbon-12 atoms weighs exactly 0.012 kg .
Each radioactive isotope has a characteristic decay time period -- the half-life -- that is determined by the amount of time needed for half of a sample to decay .
The magnetic field produced by an atom -- its magnetic moment -- is determined by these various forms of angular momentum , just as a rotating charged object classically produces a magnetic field .
However , the most dominant contribution comes from electron spin .
Due to the nature of electrons to obey the Pauli exclusion principle , in which no two electrons may be found in the same quantum state , bound electrons pair up with each other , with one member of each pair in a spin up state and the other in the opposite , spin down state .
Thus these spins cancel each other out , reducing the total magnetic dipole moment to zero in some atoms with even number of electrons .
Most of the atoms that make up the Earth and its inhabitants were present in their current form in the nebula that collapsed out of a molecular cloud to form the Solar System .
The rest are the result of radioactive decay , and their relative proportion can be used to determine the age of the Earth through radiometric dating .
Most of the helium in the crust of the Earth -LRB- about 99 % of the helium from gas wells , as shown by its lower abundance of helium-3 -RRB- is a product of alpha decay .
Mancur Olson suggests that the emergence of dictatorships can be linked to the concept of `` roving bandits '' , individuals in an atomic system that move from place to place extracting wealth from individuals .
These bandits provide a disincentive for investment and production .
Olson states that a community of individuals would be better served if that bandit were to establish himself as a stationary bandit in order to monopolize theft in the form of taxes .
Thus , a potential dictator will have greater incentive in providing security for a given community from which he is extracting from and conversely , the people from whom he extracts are more likely to produce because they will be unconcerned with potential theft by other bandits .
Roughly two research approaches exist : -LRB- 1 -RRB- the minimalist approach focuses on whether a country has continued elections that are competitive , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- the substantive approach expands the concept of democracy to include human rights , freedom of the press , the rule of law , etc. .
The DD index is seen as an example of the minimalist approach , whereas the Polity data series , relatively more substantive .
When Nishiyama Sōin , founder and leader of the Danrin school of haikai , came to Edo from Osaka in 1675 , Bashō was among the poets invited to compose with him .
It was on this occasion that he gave himself the haigō of Tōsei , and by 1680 he had a full-time job teaching twenty disciples , who published The Best Poems of Tōsei 's Twenty Disciples -LRB- 桃青門弟独吟二十歌仙 , Tōsei-montei Dokugin-Nijukasen -RRB- , advertising their connection to Tōsei 's talent .
His disciples built him a rustic hut and planted a banana tree -LRB- 芭蕉 , bashō -RRB- in the yard , giving Bashō a new haigō and his first permanent home .
He appreciated the plant very much , but was not happy to see Fukagawa 's native miscanthus grass growing alongside it :
Chinese characters are logograms used in the writing of Chinese and some other Asian languages .
They have been adapted to write a number of other languages including : Japanese , where they are known as kanji , Korean , where they are known as hanja , and Vietnamese in a system known as chữ Nôm .
Chinese characters constitute the oldest continuously used system of writing in the world .
By virtue of their widespread current use in East Asia , and historic use throughout the Sinosphere , Chinese characters are among the most widely adopted writing systems in the world by number of users .
Also called simple indicatives , this small category contains characters that are direct iconic illustrations .
Examples include 上 shàng `` up '' and 下 xià `` down '' , originally a dot above and below a line .
Hanja are still used to some extent , particularly in newspapers , weddings , place names and calligraphy -LRB- although it is nowhere near the extent of kanji use in day-to-day Japanese society -RRB- .
Hanja is also extensively used in situations where ambiguity must be avoided , such as academic papers , high-level corporate reports , government documents , and newspapers ; this is due to the large number of homonyms that have resulted from extensive borrowing of Chinese words .
Just as Roman letters have a characteristic shape -LRB- lower-case letters mostly occupying the x-height , with ascenders or descenders on some letters -RRB- , Chinese characters occupy a more or less square area in which the components of every character are written to fit in order to maintain a uniform size and shape , especially with small printed characters in Ming and sans-serif styles .
Because of this , beginners often practise writing on squared graph paper , and the Chinese sometimes use the term `` Square-Block Characters '' -LRB- 方块字 / 方塊字 , fāngkuàizì -RRB- , sometimes translated as tetragraph , in reference to Chinese characters .
There are also some extremely complex characters which have understandably become rather rare .
According to Joël Bellassen -LRB- 1989 -RRB- , the most complex Chinese character is / -LRB- U +2 A6A5 -RRB- zhé listen , meaning `` verbose '' and containing sixty-four strokes ; this character fell from use around the 5th century .
Another 64-stroke character is / -LRB- U +2053 B -RRB- zhèng composed of 興 xīng / xìng -LRB- lit .
The most complex Chinese character still in use may be biáng -LRB- pictured right , bottom -RRB- , with 58 strokes , which refers to Biang biang noodles , a type of noodle from China 's Shaanxi province .
This character along with the syllable biang can not be found in dictionaries .
The fact that it represents a syllable that does not exist in any Standard Chinese word means that it could be classified as a dialectal character .
Its leading role in the Second World War saw the emergence of the Soviet Union as a superpower , with strong influence over Eastern Europe and parts of Asia .
The European and Japanese empires were shattered and Communist parties played a leading role in many independence movements .
Marxist -- Leninist governments modeled on the Soviet Union took power with Soviet assistance in Bulgaria , Czechoslovakia , East Germany , Poland , Hungary and Romania .
A Marxist -- Leninist government was also created under Marshal Tito in Yugoslavia , but Tito 's independent policies led to the expulsion of Yugoslavia from the Cominform , which had replaced the Comintern , and Titoism was branded `` deviationist '' .
Albania also became an independent Marxist -- Leninist state after World War II .
Communism was seen as a rival of and a threat to western capitalism for most of the 20th century .
Communist thought has also been traced back to the works of the 16th-century English writer Thomas More .
In his treatise Utopia -LRB- 1516 -RRB- , More portrayed a society based on common ownership of property , whose rulers administered it through the application of reason .
In the 17th century , communist thought surfaced again in England , where a Puritan religious group known as the `` Diggers '' advocated the abolition of private ownership of land .
Eduard Bernstein , in his 1895 Cromwell and Communism argued that several groups during the English Civil War , especially the Diggers , espoused clear communistic , agrarian ideals , and that Oliver Cromwell 's attitude towards these groups was at best ambivalent and often hostile .
Criticism of the idea of private property continued into the Age of Enlightenment of the 18th century , through such thinkers as Jean Jacques Rousseau in France .
Later , following the upheaval of the French Revolution , communism emerged as a political doctrine .
The 1917 October Revolution in Russia set the conditions for the rise to state power of Lenin 's Bolsheviks , which was the first time any avowedly communist party reached that position .
The revolution transferred power to the All-Russian Congress of Soviets , in which the Bolsheviks had a majority .
The event generated a great deal of practical and theoretical debate within the Marxist movement .
Marx predicted that socialism and communism would be built upon foundations laid by the most advanced capitalist development .
Marx had explicitly stated that Russia might be able to skip the stage of bourgeois rule .
As the tectonic plates migrate , oceanic crust is subducted under the leading edges of the plates at convergent boundaries .
At the same time , the upwelling of mantle material at divergent boundaries creates mid-ocean ridges .
The combination of these processes recycles the oceanic crust back into the mantle .
The oldest oceanic crust is located in the Western Pacific and has an estimated age of 7015631152000000000 ♠ 200 Ma .
Water vapor generated through surface evaporation is transported by circulatory patterns in the atmosphere .
When atmospheric conditions permit an uplift of warm , humid air , this water condenses and falls to the surface as precipitation .
Most of the water is then transported to lower elevations by river systems and usually returned to the oceans or deposited into lakes .
This water cycle is a vital mechanism for supporting life on land and is a primary factor in the erosion of surface features over geological periods .
Precipitation patterns vary widely , ranging from several meters of water per year to less than a millimeter .
Atmospheric circulation , topographic features , and temperature differences determine the average precipitation that falls in each region .
The United Nations is a worldwide intergovernmental organization that was created with the goal of intervening in the disputes between nations , thereby avoiding armed conflict .
The U.N. serves primarily as a forum for international diplomacy and international law .
When the consensus of the membership permits , it provides a mechanism for armed intervention .
The first human to orbit Earth was Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961 .
In total , about 487 people have visited outer space and reached orbit as of 30 July 2010 , and , of these , twelve have walked on the Moon .
The station 's crew , made up of six people , is usually replaced every six months .
The farthest that humans have traveled from Earth is 400,171 km , achieved during the Apollo 13 mission in 1970 .
Earth 's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing that included water vapor .
The origin of the world 's oceans was condensation augmented by water and ice delivered by asteroids , protoplanets , and comets .
By 7000350000000000000 ♠ 3.5 Gya , Earth 's magnetic field was established , which helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind .
The original lifts for the journey between the second and third levels were supplied by Léon Edoux .
A pair of 81 m -LRB- 266 ft -RRB- hydraulic rams were mounted on the second level , reaching nearly halfway up to the third level .
One lift car was mounted on top of these rams : cables ran from the top of this car up to sheaves on the third level and back down to a second car .
Each car only travelled half the distance between the second and third levels and passengers were required to change lifts halfway by means of a short gangway .
The 10-ton cars each held 65 passengers .
On 3 January 1956 , a fire started in the television transmitter , damaging the top of the tower .
Repairs took a year , and in 1957 , the present radio aerial was added to the top .
In 1964 , the Eiffel Tower was officially declared to be a historical monument by the Minister of Cultural Affairs , André Malraux .
A year later , an additional lift system was installed in the north pillar .
The puddled iron -LRB- wrought iron -RRB- of the Eiffel Tower weighs 7,300 tons , and the addition of lifts , shops and antennae have brought the total weight to approximately 10,100 tons .
As a demonstration of the economy of design , if the 7,300 tons of metal in the structure were melted down , it would fill the square base , 125 metres -LRB- 410 ft -RRB- on each side , to a depth of only 6.25 cm -LRB- 2.46 in -RRB- assuming the density of the metal to be 7.8 tons per cubic metre .
Additionally , a cubic box surrounding the tower -LRB- 324 m x 125 m x 125 m -RRB- would contain 6,200 tons of air , weighing almost as much as the iron itself .
Depending on the ambient temperature , the top of the tower may shift away from the sun by up to 18 cm -LRB- 7 in -RRB- due to thermal expansion of the metal on the side facing the sun .
We , writers , painters , sculptors , architects and passionate devotees of the hitherto untouched beauty of Paris , protest with all our strength , with all our indignation in the name of slighted French taste , against the erection ... of this useless and monstrous Eiffel Tower ... To bring our arguments home , imagine for a moment a giddy , ridiculous tower dominating Paris like a gigantic black smokestack , crushing under its barbaric bulk Notre Dame , the Tour Saint-Jacques , the Louvre , the Dome of les Invalides , the Arc de Triomphe , all of our humiliated monuments will disappear in this ghastly dream .
The profession of soldiering as part of a military is older than recorded history itself .
Some of the most enduring images of the classical antiquity portray the power and feats of its military leaders .
The Battle of Kadesh in 1274 BC was one of the defining points of Pharaoh Ramesses II 's reign , and is celebrated in bas-relief on his monuments .
A thousand years later , the first emperor of unified China , Qin Shi Huang , was so determined to impress the gods with his military might , he was buried with an army of terracotta soldiers .
The Romans were dedicated to military matters , leaving to posterity many treatises and writings , as well as a large number of lavishly carved triumphal arches and victory columns .
These two functions are performed by military historians and military theorists who seek to identify failures and success of the armed force , and integrate corrections into the military reform , with the aim of producing an improved force capable of performing adequately , should there be a national defence policy review .
The next significant advance came with the domestication of the horses and mastering of equestrianism .
A military brat is a colloquial term for a child with at least one parent who served as an active duty member -LRB- vice reserve -RRB- in the armed forces .
Children of armed forces members may move around to different military bases or international postings , which gives them a childhood differing from the norm .
Unlike common usage of the term brat , when it is used in this context , it is not necessarily a derogatory term .
The propaganda war that accompanied World War II invariably depicted the enemy in unflattering terms .
Examples of this exist not only in posters , but also in the films of Leni Riefenstahl and Sergei Eisenstein .
Adaptation occurs through the gradual modification of existing structures .
This is the result of a single ancestral structure being adapted to function in different ways .
However , since all living organisms are related to some extent , even organs that appear to have little or no structural similarity , such as arthropod , squid and vertebrate eyes , or the limbs and wings of arthropods and vertebrates , can depend on a common set of homologous genes that control their assembly and function ; this is called deep homology .
In terms of practical application , an understanding of evolution has been instrumental to developments in numerous scientific and industrial fields , including agriculture , human and veterinary medicine , and the life sciences in general .
Discoveries in evolutionary biology have made a significant impact not just in the traditional branches of biology but also in other academic disciplines , including biological anthropology , and evolutionary psychology .
Evolutionary computation , a sub-field of artificial intelligence , involves the application of Darwinian principles to problems in computer science .
Coalitions between organisms of the same species have also evolved .
An extreme case is the eusociality found in social insects , such as bees , termites and ants , where sterile insects feed and guard the small number of organisms in a colony that are able to reproduce .
On an even smaller scale , the somatic cells that make up the body of an animal limit their reproduction so they can maintain a stable organism , which then supports a small number of the animal 's germ cells to produce offspring .
Here , somatic cells respond to specific signals that instruct them whether to grow , remain as they are , or die .
If cells ignore these signals and multiply inappropriately , their uncontrolled growth causes cancer .
Highly energetic chemistry is thought to have produced a self-replicating molecule around 4 billion years ago , and half a billion years later the last common ancestor of all life existed .
The current scientific consensus is that the complex biochemistry that makes up life came from simpler chemical reactions .
The beginning of life may have included self-replicating molecules such as RNA and the assembly of simple cells .
The history of life was that of the unicellular eukaryotes , prokaryotes and archaea until about 610 million years ago when multicellular organisms began to appear in the oceans in the Ediacaran period .
The evolution of multicellularity occurred in multiple independent events , in organisms as diverse as sponges , brown algae , cyanobacteria , slime moulds and myxobacteria .
In January 2016 , scientists reported that , about 800 million years ago , a minor genetic change in a single molecule called GK-PID may have allowed organisms to go from a single cell organism to one of many cells .
In Russia and the Soviet Union , the boundary along the Kuma -- Manych Depression was the most commonly used as early as 1906 .
In 1958 , the Soviet Geographical Society formally recommended that the boundary between the Europe and Asia be drawn in textbooks from Baydaratskaya Bay , on the Kara Sea , along the eastern foot of Ural Mountains , then following the Ural River until the Mugodzhar Hills , and then the Emba River ; and Kuma -- Manych Depression , thus placing the Caucasus entirely in Asia and the Urals entirely in Europe .
However , most geographers in the Soviet Union favoured the boundary along the Caucasus crest and this became the standard convention in the later 20th century , although the Kuma -- Manych boundary remained in use in some 20th-century maps .
The period between the year 1000 and 1300 is known as the High Middle Ages , during which the population of Europe experienced significant growth , culminating in the Renaissance of the 12th century .
Economic growth , together with the lack of safety on the mainland trading routes , made possible the development of major commercial routes along the coast of the Mediterranean and Baltic Seas .
The growing wealth and independence acquired by some coastal cities gave the Maritime Republics a leading role in the European scene .
The Papacy reached the height of its power during the High Middle Ages .
An East-West Schism in 1054 split the former Roman Empire religiously , with the Eastern Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire and the Roman Catholic Church in the former Western Roman Empire .
In 1095 Pope Urban II called for a crusade against Muslims occupying Jerusalem and the Holy Land .
In Europe itself , the Church organised the Inquisition against heretics .
In Spain , the Reconquista concluded with the fall of Granada in 1492 , ending over seven centuries of Islamic rule in the Iberian Peninsula .
The Great Famine of 1315 -- 1317 was the first crisis that would strike Europe in the late Middle Ages .
The period between 1348 and 1420 witnessed the heaviest loss .
The population of France was reduced by half .
Medieval Britain was afflicted by 95 famines , and France suffered the effects of 75 or more in the same period .
Europe was devastated in the mid-14th century by the Black Death , one of the most deadly pandemics in human history which killed an estimated 25 million people in Europe alone -- a third of the European population at the time .
The Church 's power was further weakened by the Protestant Reformation -LRB- 1517 -- 1648 -RRB- , initially sparked by the works of German theologian Martin Luther , an attempt to start a reform within the Church .
The Reformation also damaged the Holy Roman Emperor 's influence , as German princes became divided between Protestant and Roman Catholic faiths .
This eventually led to the Thirty Years War -LRB- 1618 -- 1648 -RRB- , which crippled the Holy Roman Empire and devastated much of Germany , killing between 25 and 40 percent of its population .
In the aftermath of the Peace of Westphalia , France rose to predominance within Europe .
World War I and especially World War II diminished the eminence of Western Europe in world affairs .
The United States and Western Europe established the NATO alliance and later the Soviet Union and Central Europe established the Warsaw Pact .
A number of insects , such as the small tortoiseshell butterfly , add to the biodiversity .
By the millennium change , the EU dominated the economy of Europe comprising the five largest European economies of the time namely Germany , the United Kingdom , France , Italy , and Spain .
In 1999 , 12 of the 15 members of the EU joined the Eurozone replacing their former national currencies by the common euro .
The three who chose to remain outside the Eurozone were : the United Kingdom , Denmark , and Sweden .
Emigration from Europe began with Spanish and Portuguese settlers in the 16th century , and French and English settlers in the 17th century .
But numbers remained relatively small until waves of mass emigration in the 19th century , when millions of poor families left Europe .
Slavic languages are most spoken by the number of native speakers in Europe , they are spoken in Central , Eastern , and Southeastern Europe .
Romance languages are spoken primarily in south-western Europe as well as in Romania and Moldova , in Eastern Europe .
Germanic languages are spoken in Northern Europe , the British Isles and some parts of Central Europe .
In Bruce Russell 's article `` A Priori Justification and Knowledge '' he says that it is `` knowledge based on a priori justification , '' -LRB- 1 -RRB- which relies on intuition and the nature of these intuitions .
A priori knowledge is often contrasted with posteriori knowledge , which is knowledge gained by experience .
A way to look at the difference between the two is through an example .
Bruce Russell gives two propositions in which the reader decides which one he believes more .
The Carvaka school of materialists only accepted the pramana of perception and hence were one of the first empiricists .
Epistemologists argue over whether belief is the proper truth-bearer .
Some would rather describe knowledge as a system of justified true propositions , and others as a system of justified true sentences .
Plato , in his Gorgias , argues that belief is the most commonly invoked truth-bearer .
Adjectives may precede or follow nouns ; subjects , verbs and objects may occur in any order .
Critics feel there are too many roots .
Instead of derivations of Esperanto roots , new roots are taken from European languages in the endeavor to create an international language .
Additionally , Adam Mickiewicz University in Poland offers a diploma in Interlinguistics .
The Senate of Brazil passed a bill in 2009 that would make Esperanto an optional part of the curriculum in public schools , although mandatory if there is demand for it .
Four primary schools in Britain , with some 230 pupils , are currently following a course in `` propaedeutic Esperanto '' -- that is , instruction in Esperanto to raise language awareness and accelerate subsequent learning of foreign languages -- under the supervision of the University of Manchester .
An estimate of the number of Esperanto speakers was made by Sidney S. Culbert , a retired psychology professor at the University of Washington and a longtime Esperantist , who tracked down and tested Esperanto speakers in sample areas in dozens of countries over a period of twenty years .
Culbert concluded that between one and two million people speak Esperanto at Foreign Service Level 3 , `` professionally proficient '' -LRB- able to communicate moderately complex ideas without hesitation , and to follow speeches , radio broadcasts , etc. -RRB- .
Culbert 's estimate was not made for Esperanto alone , but formed part of his listing of estimates for all languages of more than one million speakers , published annually in the World Almanac and Book of Facts .
Culbert 's most detailed account of his methodology is found in a 1989 letter to David Wolff .
Since Culbert never published detailed intermediate results for particular countries and regions , it is difficult to independently gauge the accuracy of his results .
In the television show Red Dwarf , which begins in the late 22nd century , crewman Arnold Rimmer constantly spends his time trying to learn Esperanto and failing , even compared to his bunkmate Dave Lister who only maintains a casual interest .
Additionally many of the signs around the ship Red Dwarf are written in both English and Esperanto .
The novel Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers states that , although not required , it is widely expected that officers in the Space Corps be fluent in the language , hence Rimmer 's interest .
After some ten years of development , which Zamenhof spent translating literature into Esperanto as well as writing original prose and verse , the first book of Esperanto grammar was published in Warsaw on the 26th of July 1887 .
The number of speakers grew rapidly over the next few decades , at first primarily in the Russian Empire and Central Europe , then in other parts of Europe , the Americas , China , and Japan .
In the early years , speakers of Esperanto kept in contact primarily through correspondence and periodicals , but in 1905 the first world congress of Esperanto speakers was held in Boulogne-sur-Mer , France .
Since then world congresses have been held in different countries every year , except during the two World Wars .
Russian Esperanto writer Nikolai Nekrasov was arrested during the Stalinist repressions of the late 1930s , accused of being `` an organizer and leader of a fascist , espionage , terrorist organization of Esperantists '' , and executed on 4 October 1938 .
Another Esperanto writer Vladimir Varankin was executed on 3 October 1938 .
The translation was reviewed and compared with other languages ' translations by a group of British clergy and scholars before its publication at the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1910 .
In 1926 this was published along with a New Testament translation , in an edition commonly called the `` Londona Biblio '' .
In the 1960s , the Internacia Asocio de Bibliistoj kaj Orientalistoj tried to organize a new , ecumenical Esperanto Bible version .
Since then , the Dutch Remonstrant pastor Gerrit Berveling has translated the Deuterocanonical or apocryphal books in addition to new translations of the Gospels , some of the New Testament epistles , and some books of the Tanakh or Old Testament .
These have been published in various separate booklets , or serialized in Dia Regno , but the Deuterocanonical books have appeared in recent editions of the Londona Biblio .
The term engineering is derived from the word engineer , which itself dates back to 1390 when an engine'er -LRB- literally , one who operates an engine -RRB- originally referred to `` a constructor of military engines . ''
In this context , now obsolete , an `` engine '' referred to a military machine , i.e. , a mechanical contraption used in war -LRB- for example , a catapult -RRB- .
Every product or construction used by modern society is influenced by engineering .
The results of engineering activity influence changes to the environment , society and economies , and its application brings with it a responsibility and public safety .
Many engineering societies have established codes of practice and codes of ethics to guide members and inform the public at large .
Medicine aims to sustain , repair , enhance and even replace functions of the human body , if necessary , through the use of technology .
Higher education , also called tertiary , third stage , or postsecondary education , is the non-compulsory educational level that follows the completion of a school such as a high school or secondary school .
Tertiary education is normally taken to include undergraduate and postgraduate education , as well as vocational education and training .
Colleges and universities mainly provide tertiary education .
Collectively , these are sometimes known as tertiary institutions .
Individuals who complete tertiary education generally receive certificates , diplomas , or academic degrees .
Since 1909 , the ratio of children in the developing world attending school has increased .
Before then , a small minority of boys attended school .
By the start of the 21st century , the majority of all children in most regions of the world attended school .
In formal education , a curriculum is the set of courses and their content offered at a school or university .
As an idea , curriculum stems from the Latin word for race course , referring to the course of deeds and experiences through which children grow to become mature adults .
A curriculum is prescriptive , and is based on a more general syllabus which merely specifies what topics must be understood and to what level to achieve a particular grade or standard .
State consequentialism , also known as Mohist consequentialism , is an ethical theory that evaluates the moral worth of an action based on how much it contributes to the basic goods of a state .
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy describes Mohist consequentialism , dating back to the 5th century BC , as `` a remarkably sophisticated version based on a plurality of intrinsic goods taken as constitutive of human welfare '' .
Unlike utilitarianism , which views pleasure as a moral good , `` the basic goods in Mohist consequentialist thinking are ... order , material wealth , and increase in population '' .
During Mozi 's era , war and famines were common , and population growth was seen as a moral necessity for a harmonious society .
The `` material wealth '' of Mohist consequentialism refers to basic needs like shelter and clothing , and the `` order '' of Mohist consequentialism refers to Mozi 's stance against warfare and violence , which he viewed as pointless and a threat to social stability .
Plagiarism is the failure to give credit to another author 's work or ideas , when it is used in the publication .
It is the obligation of the editor of the journal to ensure the article does not contain any plagiarism before it is published .
If a publication which has already been published is proven to contain plagiarism , then the editor of the journal can proceed to have the article retracted .
Throughout his entire career , Presley performed in only three venues outside the United States -- all of them in Canada , during brief tours there in 1957 .
Rumors that he would play overseas for the first time were fueled in 1974 by a million-dollar bid for an Australian tour .
Parker was uncharacteristically reluctant , prompting those close to Presley to speculate about the manager 's past and the reasons for his apparent unwillingness to apply for a passport .
Parker ultimately squelched any notions Presley had of working abroad , claiming that foreign security was poor and the venues unsuitable for a star of his magnitude .
It 's a whole new social revolution -- the sixties came from it . ''
Bob Dylan described the sensation of first hearing Presley as `` like busting out of jail '' .
After training , Presley joined the 3rd Armored Division in Friedberg , Germany , on October 1 .
Introduced to amphetamines by a sergeant while on maneuvers , he became `` practically evangelical about their benefits '' -- not only for energy , but for `` strength '' and weight loss , as well -- and many of his friends in the outfit joined him in indulging .
The Army also introduced Presley to karate , which he studied seriously , later including it in his live performances .
Fellow soldiers have attested to Presley 's wish to be seen as an able , ordinary soldier , despite his fame , and to his generosity .
Presley returned to the United States on March 2 , 1960 , and was honorably discharged with the rank of sergeant on March 5 .
The train that carried him from New Jersey to Tennessee was mobbed all the way , and Presley was called upon to appear at scheduled stops to please his fans .
On the night of March 20 , he entered RCA 's Nashville studio to cut tracks for a new album along with a single , `` Stuck on You '' , which was rushed into release and swiftly became a number one hit .
Another Nashville session two weeks later yielded a pair of his best-selling singles , the ballads `` It 's Now or Never '' and `` Are You Lonesome Tonight ? ''
The album features several songs described by Greil Marcus as full of Chicago blues `` menace , driven by Presley 's own super-miked acoustic guitar , brilliant playing by Scotty Moore , and demonic sax work from Boots Randolph .
As a whole , the record `` conjured up the vision of a performer who could be all things '' , in the words of music historian John Robertson : `` a flirtatious teenage idol with a heart of gold ; a tempestuous , dangerous lover ; a gutbucket blues singer ; a sophisticated nightclub entertainer ; -LSB- a -RSB- raucous rocker '' .
Presley and his wife , meanwhile , had become increasingly distant , barely cohabiting .
In 1971 , an affair he had with Joyce Bova resulted -- unbeknownst to him -- in her pregnancy and an abortion .
The Presleys separated on February 23 , 1972 , after Priscilla disclosed her relationship with Mike Stone , a karate instructor Presley had recommended to her .
Priscilla relates that when she told him , Presley `` grabbed ... and forcefully made love to '' her , declaring , `` This is how a real man makes love to his woman . ''
Presley and his wife filed for divorce on August 18 .
, cowritten by the three bodyguards fired the previous year , was published on August 1 .
He was devastated by the book and tried unsuccessfully to halt its release by offering money to the publishers .
By this point , he suffered from multiple ailments : glaucoma , high blood pressure , liver damage , and an enlarged colon , each aggravated -- and possibly caused -- by drug abuse .
Genetic analysis of a hair sample in 2014 found evidence of genetic variants that could have caused his glaucoma , migraines and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy .
Despite the largely positive view of Presley held by African Americans , a rumor spread in mid-1957 that he had at some point announced , `` The only thing Negroes can do for me is buy my records and shine my shoes . ''
A journalist with the national African American weekly Jet , Louie Robinson , pursued the story .
Now if this guy hated blacks , he would n't even have gone near them '' .
Robinson found no evidence that the remark had ever been made , and on the contrary elicited testimony from many individuals indicating that Presley was anything but racist .
Blues singer Ivory Joe Hunter , who had heard the rumor before he visited Graceland one evening , reported of Presley , `` He showed me every courtesy , and I think he 's one of the greatest . ''
Dudley Brooks , an African-American composer and studio musician who worked with Presley during the 1950s and 1960s , also disputed allegations that Presley was a racist .
Though the rumored remark was wholly discredited at the time , it was still being used against Presley decades later .
On the set of Jailhouse Rock , Presley granted Robinson an interview , though he was no longer dealing with the mainstream press .
He denied making such a statement or holding in any way to its racist view : `` I never said anything like that , and people who know me know that I would n't have said it ... A lot of people seem to think I started this business .
Also , Red Robinson stated , `` Take a look at the things that are only publicized now , of how he 'd be driving down the street and see a destitute black woman with a little child .
In 2007 , member states agreed that , in future , 20 % of the energy used across the EU must be renewable , and carbon dioxide emissions have to be lower in 2020 by at least 20 % compared to 1990 levels .
The EU has adopted an emissions trading system to incorporate carbon emissions into the economy .
The European Green Capital is an annual award given to cities that focuses on the environment , energy efficiency and quality of life in urban areas to create smart city .
The perceived benefits of becoming a member of the EU act as an incentive for both political and economic reform in states wishing to fulfil the EU 's accession criteria , and are considered an important factor contributing to the reform of European formerly Communist countries .
This influence on the internal affairs of other countries is generally referred to as `` soft power '' , as opposed to military `` hard power '' .
The difference between the richest and poorest regions -LRB- 276 NUTS-2 regions of the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics -RRB- ranged , in 2014 , from 30 % of the EU28 average to 539 % , or from $ 8,200 to $ 148,000 -LRB- about US$ 9,000 to US$ 162,000 -RRB- .
According to new polls about religiosity in the European Union in 2012 by Eurobarometer , Christianity is the largest religion in the European Union , accounting for 72 % of the EU population .
Catholics are the largest Christian group , accounting for 48 % of the EU population , while Protestants make up 12 % , Eastern Orthodox make up 8 % and other Christians make up 4 % .
Eurostat 's Eurobarometer opinion polls showed in 2005 that 52 % of EU citizens believed in a God , 27 % in `` some sort of spirit or life force '' , and 18 % had no form of belief .
Many countries have experienced falling church attendance and membership in recent years .
The countries where the fewest people reported a religious belief were Estonia -LRB- 16 % -RRB- and the Czech Republic -LRB- 19 % -RRB- .
The most religious countries were Malta -LRB- 95 % , predominantly Roman Catholic -RRB- as well as Cyprus and Romania -LRB- both predominantly Orthodox -RRB- each with about 90 % of citizens professing a belief in God .
Across the EU , belief was higher among women , older people , those with religious upbringing , those who left school at 15 or 16 and those `` positioning themselves on the right of the political scale '' .
Light usually has multiple frequencies that sum to form the resultant wave .
Different frequencies undergo different angles of refraction , a phenomenon known as dispersion .
A wave consists of successive troughs and crests , and the distance between two adjacent crests or troughs is called the wavelength .
Waves of the electromagnetic spectrum vary in size , from very long radio waves the size of buildings to very short gamma rays smaller than atom nuclei .
This is sometimes known as the Planck -- Einstein equation .
The source of Einstein 's proposal that light was composed of particles -LRB- or could act as particles in some circumstances -RRB- was an experimental anomaly not explained by the wave theory : the photoelectric effect , in which light striking a metal surface ejected electrons from the surface , causing an electric current to flow across an applied voltage .
Experimental measurements demonstrated that the energy of individual ejected electrons was proportional to the frequency , rather than the intensity , of the light .
Furthermore , below a certain minimum frequency , which depended on the particular metal , no current would flow regardless of the intensity .
These observations appeared to contradict the wave theory , and for years physicists tried in vain to find an explanation .
In 1905 , Einstein explained this puzzle by resurrecting the particle theory of light to explain the observed effect .
Because of the preponderance of evidence in favor of the wave theory , however , Einstein 's ideas were met initially with great skepticism among established physicists .
Eventually Einstein 's explanation was accepted as new particle-like behavior of light was observed , such as the Compton effect .
EM radiation -LRB- the designation ` radiation ' excludes static electric and magnetic and near fields -RRB- is classified by wavelength into radio , microwave , infrared , visible , ultraviolet , X-rays and gamma rays .
Arbitrary electromagnetic waves can be expressed by Fourier analysis in terms of sinusoidal monochromatic waves , which in turn can each be classified into these regions of the EMR spectrum .
Most UV and X-rays are blocked by absorption first from molecular nitrogen , and then -LRB- for wavelengths in the upper UV -RRB- from the electronic excitation of dioxygen and finally ozone at the mid-range of UV .
Only 30 % of the Sun 's ultraviolet light reaches the ground , and almost all of this is well transmitted .
However , at energies too low to excite water vapor , the atmosphere becomes transparent again , allowing free transmission of most microwave and radio waves .
, which can be seen immediately from the Poynting vector .
The electric field , magnetic field , and direction of wave propagation are all orthogonal , and the wave propagates in the same direction as
The name `` euro '' was officially adopted in Madrid on 16 December 1995 .
Belgian Esperantist Germain Pirlot , a former teacher of French and history is credited with naming the new currency by sending a letter to then President of the European Commission , Jacques Santer , suggesting the name `` euro '' on 4 August 1995 .
The possibility of the euro becoming the first international reserve currency is now widely debated among economists .
Former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan gave his opinion in September 2007 that it was `` absolutely conceivable that the euro will replace the US dollar as reserve currency , or will be traded as an equally important reserve currency '' .
In contrast to Greenspan 's 2007 assessment , the euro 's increase in the share of the worldwide currency reserve basket has slowed considerably since 2007 and since the beginning of the worldwide credit crunch related recession and European sovereign-debt crisis .
A 2009 consensus from the studies of the introduction of the euro concluded that it has increased trade within the eurozone by 5 % to 10 % , although one study suggested an increase of only 3 % while another estimated 9 to 14 % .
However , a meta-analysis of all available studies suggests that the prevalence of positive estimates is caused by publication bias and that the underlying effect may be negligible .
Furthermore , studies accounting for time trend reflecting general cohesion policies in Europe that started before , and continue after implementing the common currency find no effect on trade .
These results suggest that other policies aimed at European integration might be the source of observed increase in trade .
The introduction of the euro seems to have had a strong effect on European financial integration .
According to a study on this question , it has `` significantly reshaped the European financial system , especially with respect to the securities markets -LSB- ... -RSB- However , the real and policy barriers to integration in the retail and corporate banking sectors remain significant , even if the wholesale end of banking has been largely integrated . ''
Specifically , the euro has significantly decreased the cost of trade in bonds , equity , and banking assets within the eurozone .
On a global level , there is evidence that the introduction of the euro has led to an integration in terms of investment in bond portfolios , with eurozone countries lending and borrowing more between each other than with other countries .
Since 5 January 2002 , the national central banks -LRB- NCBs -RRB- and the ECB have issued euro banknotes on a joint basis .
Euro banknotes do not show which central bank issued them .
Eurosystem NCBs are required to accept euro banknotes put into circulation by other Eurosystem members and these banknotes are not repatriated .
The ECB issues 8 % of the total value of banknotes issued by the Eurosystem .
In practice , the ECB 's banknotes are put into circulation by the NCBs , thereby incurring matching liabilities vis-à-vis the ECB .
These liabilities carry interest at the main refinancing rate of the ECB .
The other 92 % of the euro banknotes are issued by the NCBs in proportion to their respective shares in the capital key of the ECB , calculated using national share of European Union population and national share of European Union GDP , equally weighted .
In 1887 , Heinrich Hertz discovered that electrodes illuminated with ultraviolet light create electric sparks more easily .
In 1905 Albert Einstein published a paper that explained experimental data from the photoelectric effect as being the result of light energy being carried in discrete quantized packets , energising electrons .
This discovery led to the quantum revolution .
Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for `` his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect '' .
The photoelectric effect is also employed in photocells such as can be found in solar panels and this is frequently used to make electricity commercially .
The presence of an electric charge , which can be either positive or negative , produces an electric field .
On the other hand , the movement of electric charges , which is known as electric current , produces a magnetic field .
With electricity ceasing to be a novelty and becoming a necessity of everyday life in the later half of the 20th century , it required particular attention by popular culture only when it stops flowing , an event that usually signals disaster .
The people who keep it flowing , such as the nameless hero of Jimmy Webb 's song `` Wichita Lineman '' -LRB- 1968 -RRB- , are still often cast as heroic , wizard-like figures .
In the International System of Units -LRB- SI -RRB- , the unit of energy is the joule , named after James Prescott Joule .
It is equal to the energy expended -LRB- or work done -RRB- in applying a force of one newton through a distance of one metre .
However energy is also expressed in many other units not part of the SI , such as ergs , calories , British Thermal Units , kilowatt-hours and kilocalories , which require a conversion factor when expressed in SI units .
Other energy units such as the electronvolt , food calorie or thermodynamic kcal -LRB- based on the temperature change of water in a heating process -RRB- , and BTU are used in specific areas of science and commerce .
Living organisms require available energy to stay alive , such as the energy humans get from food .
Civilisation gets the energy it needs from energy resources such as fossil fuels , nuclear fuel , or renewable energy .
The processes of Earth 's climate and ecosystem are driven by the radiant energy Earth receives from the sun and the geothermal energy contained within the earth .
Energy gives rise to weight when it is trapped in a system with zero momentum , where it can be weighed .
It is also equivalent to mass , and this mass is always associated with it .
Mass is also equivalent to a certain amount of energy , and likewise always appears associated with it , as described in mass-energy equivalence .
The formula E = mc ² , derived by Albert Einstein -LRB- 1905 -RRB- quantifies the relationship between rest-mass and rest-energy within the concept of special relativity .
In different theoretical frameworks , similar formulas were derived by J. J. Thomson -LRB- 1881 -RRB- , Henri Poincaré -LRB- 1900 -RRB- , Friedrich Hasenöhrl -LRB- 1904 -RRB- and others -LRB- see Mass-energy equivalence #History for further information -RRB- .
In this case , energy can only be exchanged between adjacent regions of space , and all observers agree as to the volumetric density of energy in any given space .
There is also a global law of conservation of energy , stating that the total energy of the universe can not change ; this is a corollary of the local law , but not vice versa .
As shown rigorously by Noether 's theorem , the conservation of energy is a mathematical consequence of translational symmetry of time , a property of most phenomena below the cosmic scale that makes them independent of their locations on the time coordinate .
The uncertainty principle should not be confused with energy conservation - rather it provides mathematical limits to which energy can in principle be defined and measured .
Opened in 1994 as a complement to the observation deck , the New York Sky ride -LRB- or NY Sky ride -RRB- is a simulated aerial tour over the city .
The cinematic presentation lasts approximately 25 minutes .
In The Time Machine -LRB- 2002 -RRB- , the Empire State Building is still standing in the year 2030 , but dwarfed by several larger skyscrapers around it .
It is not visible in later scenes set in a post-apocalyptic New York .
Some applications -LRB- like Apple Mail -RRB- leave attachments encoded in messages for searching while also saving separate copies of the attachments .
Others separate attachments from messages and save them in a specific directory .
The Internet Message Access Protocol -LRB- IMAP -RRB- provides features to manage a mailbox from multiple devices .
Small portable devices like smartphones are increasingly used to check email while travelling , and to make brief replies , larger devices with better keyboard access being used to reply at greater length .
IMAP shows the headers of messages , the sender and the subject and the device needs to request to download specific messages .
Usually mail is left in folders in the mail server .
mail was the form used in the original protocol standard , RFC 524 .
The service is referred to as mail , and a single piece of electronic mail is called a message .
1979 -- EMAIL , an application written by Shiva Ayyadurai for the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey .
He claims to have `` invented '' e-mail due to certain functionality in the program , but these claims have been disputed by various parties , and have also been the subject of lawsuits against media outlets .
While Mont Blanc was first climbed in 1786 , most of the Alpine four-thousanders were climbed during the second half of the 19th century ; the ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865 marked the end of the golden age of alpinism .
Karl Blodig -LRB- 1859 -- 1956 -RRB- was among the first to successfully climb all the major 4,000 m peaks .
Reptiles such as adders and vipers live up to the snow line ; because they can not bear the cold temperatures they hibernate underground and soak up the warmth on rocky ledges .
The high-altitude Alpine salamanders have adapted to living above the snow line by giving birth to fully developed young rather than laying eggs .
Brown trout can be found in the streams up to the snow line .
Molluscs such as the wood snail live up the snow line .
Popularly gathered as food , the snails are now protected .
In the 19th century , the monasteries built in the high Alps during the medieval period to shelter travellers and as places of pilgrimage , became tourist destinations .
The Benedictines had built monasteries in Lucerne , Switzerland , and Oberammergau ; the Cistercians in the Tyrol and at Lake Constance ; and the Augustinians had abbeys in the Savoy and one in the centre of Interlaken , Switzerland .
The Great St Bernard Hospice , built in the 9th or 10th centuries , at the summit of the Great Saint Bernard Pass was shelter for travellers and place for pilgrims since its inception ; by the 19th century it became a tourist attraction with notable visitors such as author Charles Dickens and mountaineer Edward Whymper .
Roofs are traditionally constructed from Alpine rocks such as pieces of schist , gneiss or slate .
Such chalets are typically found in the higher parts of the valleys , as in the Maurienne valley in Savoy , where the amount of snow during the cold months is important .
The inclination of the roof can not exceed 40 % , allowing the snow to stay on top , thereby functioning as insulation from the cold .
In the lower areas where the forests are widespread , wooden tiles are traditionally used .
Commonly made of Norway spruce , they are called `` tavaillon '' .
In the Slavic Alps alone 19 dialects have been identified .
Some of the French dialects spoken in the French , Swiss and Italian alps of Aosta Valley derive from Arpitan , while the southern part of the western range is related to Old Provençal ; the German dialects derive from Germanic tribal languages .
Romansh , spoken by two percent of the population in southeast Switzerland , is an ancient Rhaeto-Romanic language derived from Latin , remnants of ancient Celtic languages and perhaps Etruscan .
In Weimar , Bach continued to play and compose for the organ , and to perform concert music with the duke 's ensemble .
He also began to write the preludes and fugues which were later assembled into his monumental work The Well-Tempered Clavier -LRB- Das Wohltemperierte Klavier -- `` Klavier '' meaning clavichord or harpsichord -RRB- , consisting of two books , compiled in 1722 and 1744 , each containing 24 preludes and fugues in every major and minor key .
Bach published or carefully compiled in manuscript many collections of pieces that explored the range of artistic and technical possibilities inherent in almost every genre of his time except opera .
For example , the The Well-Tempered Clavier comprises two books , each of which presents a prelude and fugue in every major and minor key , displaying a dizzying variety of structural , contrapuntal and fugal techniques .
The librettos , that is the lyrics , for his vocal compositions played an important role for Bach : he sought collaboration with various text authors for his cantatas and major vocal compositions , eventually writing or adapting such texts himself to make them fit in the structure of the composition he was designing , when he could not lean on the talents of other text authors .
His collaboration with Picander for the St Matthew Passion libretto is best known , but there was a similar process to come to a multi-layered structure for his St John Passion libretto a few years earlier .
Bach 's cantatas vary greatly in form and instrumentation , including those for solo singers , single choruses , small instrumental groups , and grand orchestras .
Many consist of a large opening chorus followed by one or more recitative-aria pairs for soloists -LRB- or duets -RRB- and a concluding chorale .
The melody of the concluding chorale often appears as a cantus firmus in the opening movement .
Bach 's motets -LRB- BWV 225 -- 231 -RRB- are pieces on sacred themes for choir and continuo , with instruments playing colla parte .
Several of them were composed for funerals .
The six motets certainly composed by Bach are Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied , Der Geist hilft unser Schwachheit auf , Jesu , meine Freude , Fürchte dich nicht , Komm , Jesu , komm , and Lobet den Herrn , alle Heiden .
160 -RRB- , other parts of which may be based on work by Telemann .
Bach wrote many works for harpsichord , some of which may have been played on the clavichord .
The larger works are usually intended for a harpsichord with two manuals , while performing them on a keyboard instrument with a single manual -LRB- like a piano -RRB- may provide technical difficulties for the crossing of hands .
Many of his keyboard works are anthologies that encompass whole theoretical systems in an encyclopaedic fashion .
Qin Shi Huang also followed the school of the five elements , earth , wood , metal , fire and water .
（ 五德終始說 ） Zhao Zheng 's birth element is water , which is connected with the colour black .
It was also believed that the royal house of the previous dynasty Zhou had ruled by the power of fire , which was the colour red .
The new Qin dynasty must be ruled by the next element on the list , which is water , represented by the colour black .
Black became the colour for garments , flags , pennants .
Other associations include north as the cardinal direction , winter season and the number six .
In one case he sent Xu Fu , a Zhifu islander , with ships carrying hundreds of young men and women in search of the mystical Penglai mountain .
They were sent to find Anqi Sheng , a 1,000-year-old magician whom Qin Shi Huang had supposedly met in his travels and who had invited him to seek him there .
These people never returned , perhaps because they knew that if they returned without the promised elixir , they would surely be executed .
Legends claim that they reached Japan and colonized it .
Some of the executed scholars were those who had been unable to offer any evidence of their supernatural schemes .
This may have been the ultimate means of testing their abilities : if any of them had magic powers , then they would surely come back to life when they were let out again .
Since the great emperor was afraid of death and `` evil spirits '' , he had workers build a series of tunnels and passageways to each of his palaces -LRB- he owned over 200 -RRB- , because traveling unseen would supposedly keep him safe from the evil spirits .
Qin Shi Huangdi was said to have died by drinking mercury , believing it to be an elixir of immortality .
Another historian , Ma Feibai -LRB- 馬非百 -RRB- , published in 1941 a full-length revisionist biography of the First Emperor entitled Qín Shǐ Huángdì Zhuàn -LRB- 秦始皇帝傳 -RRB- , calling him `` one of the great heroes of Chinese history '' .
Ma compared him with the contemporary leader Chiang Kai-shek and saw many parallels in the careers and policies of the two men , both of whom he admired .
Chiang 's Northern Expedition of the late 1920s , which directly preceded the new Nationalist government at Nanjing was compared to the unification brought about by Qin Shi Huang .
Hero -LRB- 2002 -RRB- - The film stars Jet Li , a nameless assassin who plans an assassination attempt on the King of Qin -LRB- Chen Daoming -RRB- .
According to the Records of the Grand Historian , written by Sima Qian during the Han dynasty , the first emperor was the eldest son of the Qin prince Yiren , who later became King Zhuangxiang of Qin .
Prince Yiren at that time was residing at the court of Zhao , serving as a hostage to guarantee the armistice between the Qin and Zhao states .
Lü consented for her to be Yiren 's wife , who then became known as Lady Zhao -LRB- Zhao Ji -RRB- after the state of Zhao .
Lady Zhao gave birth to the child on 18 February ; and he was given the name Zhao Zheng -- the name Zheng -LRB- 正 -RRB- came from his month of birth Zhengyue -LRB- 正月 -RRB- , the first month of the Chinese lunar calendar ; the clan name of Zhao came from his father 's lineage and was unrelated to either his mother 's name or the location of his birth .
Lü Buwei 's machinations later helped Yiren become King Zhuangxiang of Qin in 250 BC .
The small intestine supports the body 's immune system .
The presence of probiotic gut flora appears to contribute positively to the host 's immune system .
The length of the small intestine can vary greatly , from as short as 2.75 m -LRB- 9.0 ft -RRB- to as long as 10.49 m -LRB- 34.4 ft -RRB- .
The length depends both on how tall the person is and how the length is measured .
The ileum joins to the cecum of the large intestine at the ileocecal junction .
Geologists study how rocks and minerals form .
Scientists who compare the geology of other planets to Earth are planetary geologists .
Some geologists study the Moon .
Others look for petroleum .
Still others specialize in studying soil .
Some geologists can tell how old rocks are and determine how different rock layers formed .
Geologists might study rivers and lakes , the underground water found between soil and rock particles , or even water that is frozen in glaciers .
Earth scientists also need geographers who explore the features of Earths surface and work with cartographers , who make maps .
Geologists also study fossils and Earths history .
There is so much to know about our home planet that most geologists become specialists in one area .
For example , a mineralogist studies minerals , as seen in -LRB- Figure 1.11 -RRB- .
Some volcanologists brave molten lava to study volcanoes .
Seismologists monitor earthquakes worldwide to help protect people and property from harm -LRB- Figure 1.11 -RRB- .
Contaminants are polluting the waters .
Global warming is melting the thick ice caps and warming the water .
Warmer water expands and , along with water from the melting ice caps , causes sea levels to rise .
Marine geology looks at rocks and structures in the ocean basins .
Marine biology looks at marine life .
Graph is to write and refers to map making .
But mapping the oceans is how oceanography started .
More than 70 % of Earths surface is covered with water .
Scientists have visited the deepest parts of the ocean in submarines .
Some people call the ocean the last frontier .
Meteorologists dont study meteors they study the atmosphere !
Climatologists have found that humans are putting a lot of extra carbon dioxide into the atmosphere .
Trapped heat causes the atmosphere to heat up .
Meteorology includes the study of weather patterns , clouds , hurricanes , and tornadoes .
Using radars and satellites , meteorologists work to predict , or forecast , the weather -LRB- Figure 1.14 -RRB- .
The atmosphere is a thin layer of gas that surrounds Earth .
Climatologists study the atmosphere .
These scientists work to understand the climate as it is now .
They also study how climate will change in response to global warming .
The atmosphere contains small amounts of carbon dioxide .
Environmental scientists study the ways that humans affect the planet we live on .
We hope to find better ways of living that can also help the environment .
They try to predict the chain reactions that could occur when one part of the ecosystem is disrupted .
Astronomy and astronomers have shown that the planets in our solar system are not the only planets in the universe .
Over 530 planets were known outside our solar system in 2011 .
Astronomers ask a wide variety of questions .
How do strong bursts of energy from the Sun , called solar flares , affect communications ?
How might an impact from an asteroid affect life on Earth ?
Astronomers ask bigger questions too .
Are there resources on other planets that people could use ?
Astronomers use what Earth scientists know to make comparisons with other planets .
The universe also contains black holes , other galaxies , asteroids , comets , and nebula .
Astronomers use many tools to study things in space .
Earth-orbiting telescopes view stars and galaxies from the darkness of space -LRB- Figure 1.17 -RRB- .
They may have optical and radio telescopes to see things that the human eye cant see .
Spacecraft travel great distances to send back information on faraway places .
Flowing water can erode rocks and soil .
As the water slows even more , smaller particles are deposited .
The graph in Figure 10.1 shows how water velocity and particle size influence erosion and deposition .
Water dissolves minerals from rocks and carries the ions .
This process happens really slowly .
But over millions of years , flowing water dissolves massive amounts of rock .
Moving water also picks up and carries particles of soil and rock .
The size of the eroded particles depends on the velocity of the water .
As water slows , larger particles are deposited .
What causes water to move faster ?
The slope of the land over which the water flows is one factor .
The size of particles determines how they are carried by flowing water .
This is illustrated in Figure 10.2 .
The biggest particles , including gravel and pebbles , are moved by traction .
In this process , the particles roll or drag along the bottom of the water .
Minerals that dissolve in water form salts .
Small particles , such as clay and silt , are carried in suspension .
These particles are not dissolved in the water .
Somewhat bigger particles , such as sand , are moved by saltation .
The particles move in little jumps near the stream bottom .
Flowing water slows down when it reaches flatter land or flows into a body of still water .
The water starts dropping the particles it was carrying .
The smallest particles settle out last .
Water that flows over Earths surface includes runoff , streams , and rivers .
All these types of flowing water can cause erosion and deposition .
When a lot of rain falls in a short period of time , much of the water is unable to soak into the ground .
Gravity causes the water to flow from higher to lower ground .
As the runoff flows , it may pick up loose material on the surface , such as bits of soil and sand .
Runoff is likely to cause more erosion if the land is bare .
Plants help hold the soil in place .
The runoff water in Figure 10.3 is brown because it eroded soil from a bare , sloping field .
Much of the material eroded by runoff is carried into bodies of water , such as streams , rivers , ponds , lakes , or oceans .
Streams often start in mountains , where the land is very steep .
A mountain stream flows very quickly because of the steep slope .
This causes a lot of erosion and very little deposition .
The rapidly falling water digs down into the stream bed and makes it deeper .
Mountain streams may erode waterfalls .
As shown in Figure 10.5 , a waterfall forms where a stream flows from an area of harder to softer rock .
The water erodes the softer rock faster than the harder rock .
This causes the stream bed to drop down , like a step , creating a waterfall .
As erosion continues , the waterfall gradually moves upstream .
Rivers flowing over gentle slopes erode the sides of their channels more than the bottom .
Large curves , called meanders , form because of erosion and deposition by the moving water .
The curves are called meanders because they slowly wander over the land .
You can see how this happens in Figure 10.6 .
As meanders erode from side to side , they create a floodplain .
Eventually , a meander may become cut off from the rest of the river .
This forms an oxbow lake , like the one in Figure 10.6 .
When a stream or river slows down , it starts dropping its sediments .
Larger sediments are dropped in steep areas , but smaller sediments can still be carried .
An example is shown in Figure 10.7 .
Smaller sediments are dropped as the slope becomes less steep .
Alluvial Fans In arid regions , a mountain stream may flow onto flatter land .
The deposits form an alluvial fan , like the one in Figure 10.7 .
Deltas Deposition also occurs when a stream or river empties into a large body of still water .
A flood occurs when a river overflows it banks .
This might happen because of heavy rains .
Floodplains As the water spreads out over the land , it slows down and drops its sediment .
If a river floods often , the floodplain develops a thick layer of rich soil because of all the deposits .
Thats why floodplains are usually good places for growing plants .
For example , the Nile River in Egypt provides both water and thick sediments for raising crops in the middle of a sandy desert .
Natural Levees A flooding river often forms natural levees along its banks .
A levee is a raised strip of sediments deposited close to the waters edge .
Levees occur because floodwaters deposit their biggest sediments first when they overflow the rivers banks .
Some water soaks into the ground .
The water moves slowly , pulled deeper and deeper by gravity .
Underground water can also erode and deposit material .
As groundwater moves through rock , it dissolves minerals .
Some rocks dissolve more easily than others .
Both types of formations grow in size as water keeps dripping and more minerals are deposited .
Over time , the water may dissolve large underground holes , or caves .
Groundwater drips from the ceiling to the floor of a cave .
This water is rich in dissolved minerals .
When the minerals come out of solution , they are deposited .
A stalactite is a pointed , icicle-like mineral deposit that forms on the ceiling of a cave .
A stalagmite is a more rounded mineral deposit that forms on the floor of a cave -LRB- Figure 10.9 -RRB- .
As erosion by groundwater continues , the ceiling of a cave may collapse .
The rock and soil above it sink into the ground .
This forms a sinkhole on the surface .
Some sinkholes are big enough to swallow vehicles and buildings .
All waves are the way energy travels through matter .
Ocean waves are energy traveling through water .
Wind energy is transferred to the sea surface .
Then , the energy is carried through the water by the waves .
Figure 10.11 shows ocean waves crashing against rocks on a shore .
Runoff , streams , and rivers carry sediment to the oceans .
The sediment in ocean water acts like sandpaper .
The bigger the waves are and the more sediment they carry , the more erosion they cause .
Erosion by waves can create unique landforms -LRB- Figure 10.12 -RRB- .
Wave-cut cliffs form when waves erode a rocky shoreline .
They create a vertical wall of exposed rock layers .
Sea arches form when waves erode both sides of a cliff .
Sea stacks form when waves erode the top of a sea arch .
This leaves behind pillars of rock .
The smallest particles , such as silt and clay , are deposited away from shore .
Larger particles are deposited on the beach .
In relatively quiet areas along a shore , waves may deposit sand .
Sand forms a beach , like the one in Figure 10.13 .
Many beaches include bits of rock and shell .
Most waves strike the shore at an angle .
This causes longshore drift .
Longshore drift moves sediment along the shore .
Sediment is moved up the beach by an incoming wave .
The wave approaches at an angle to the shore .
Water then moves straight offshore .
The sediment moves straight down the beach with it .
The sediment is again picked up by a wave that is coming in at an angle .
Deposits from longshore drift may form a spit .
A spit is a ridge of sand that extends away from the shore .
Waves may also deposit sediments to form sandbars and barrier islands .
Shores are attractive places to live and vacation .
Wave erosion threatens many homes and beaches on the ocean .
Barrier islands provide natural protection to shorelines .
Storm waves strike the barrier island before they reach the shore .
People also build artificial barriers , called breakwaters .
Breakwaters also protect the shoreline from incoming waves .
Longshore drift can erode the sediment from a beach .
To keep this from happening , people may build a series of groins .
It stops waves from moving right along the beach .
This stops the sand on the upcurrent side and reduces beach erosion .
Glaciers form when more snow falls than melts each year .
Over many years , layer upon layer of snow compacts and turns to ice .
Valley glaciers form in mountains and flow downhill through mountain river valleys .
Each type forms some unique features through erosion and deposition .
An example of each type is pictured in Figure 10.27 .
A continental glacier is spread out over a huge area .
It may cover most of a continent .
Today , continental glaciers cover most of Greenland and Antarctica .
Like flowing water , flowing ice erodes the land and deposits the material elsewhere .
Glaciers cause erosion in two main ways : plucking and abrasion .
Plucking is the process by which rocks and other sediments are picked up by a glacier .
Abrasion is the process in which a glacier scrapes underlying rock .
The sediments and rocks frozen in the ice at the bottom and sides of a glacier act like sandpaper .
Valley glaciers form several unique features through erosion .
As a valley glacier flows through a V-shaped river valley , it scrapes away the sides of the valley .
A line called the trimline shows the highest level the glacier reached .
A cirque is a rounded hollow carved in the side of a mountain by a glacier .
The highest cliff of a cirque is called the headwall .
An arte is a jagged ridge that remains when cirques form on opposite sides of a mountain .
A low spot in an arte is called a col. A horn is a sharp peak that is left behind when glacial cirques are on at least three sides of a mountain .
Glaciers deposit their sediment when they melt .
They drop and leave behind whatever was once frozen in their ice .
Drumlins often occur in groups called drumlin fields .
The narrow end of each drumlin points in the direction the glacier was moving when it dropped the sediments .
A kettle lake occurs where a chunk of ice was left behind in the sediments of a retreating glacier .
When the ice melted , it left a depression .
The meltwater filled it to form a lake .
Its usually a mixture of particles and rocks of all sizes , called glacial till .
Water from the melting ice may form lakes or other water features .
Figure 10.29 shows some of the landforms glaciers deposit when they melt .
Moraine is sediment deposited by a glacier .
A ground moraine is a thick layer of sediments left behind by a retreating glacier .
An end moraine is a low ridge of sediments deposited at the end of the glacier .
It marks the greatest distance the glacier advanced .
A drumlin is a long , low hill of sediments deposited by a glacier .
Fossils are preserved remains or traces of organisms that lived in the past .
Examples of these kinds of fossils are pictured in Figure 11.1 .
Preserved traces can include footprints , burrows , or even wastes .
Examples of trace fossils are also shown in Figure 11.1 .
The process by which remains or traces of living things become fossils is called fossilization .
Most fossils are preserved in sedimentary rocks .
Most fossils form when a dead organism is buried in sediment .
The remains inside the rock also turn to rock .
The remains are replaced by minerals .
The remains literally turn to stone .
Fossilization is illustrated in Figure 11.2 .
Fossils may form in other ways .
Molds and casts usually form in sedimentary rock .
With compression , an organisms remains are put under great pressure inside rock layers .
This leaves behind a dark stain in the rock .
As seen below , tree sap may cover an organism and then turn into amber .
The original organism is preserved so that scientists might be able to study its DNA .
Organisms can also be completely preserved in tar or ice .
Molds and casts are another way organisms can be fossilized .
A mold is an imprint of an organism left in rock .
The organisms remains break down completely .
Rock that fills in the mold resembles the original remains .
The fossil that forms in the mold is called a cast .
Its very unlikely that any given organism will become a fossil .
Remains also may be broken down by other living things or by the elements .
Hard parts , such as bones , are much more likely to become fossils .
Of all the organisms that ever lived , only a tiny number became fossils .
Still , scientists learn a lot from fossils .
Fossils give clues about major geological events .
Fossils can also give clues about past climates .
Currently , Antarctica is almost completely covered with ice .
The fossil plants show that Antarctica once had a much warmer climate .
Fossils of ocean animals are found at the top of Mt.
These fossils show that the area was once at the bottom of a sea .
The seabed was later uplifted to form the Himalaya mountain range .
An example is shown in the Figure 11.4 .
Fossils of plants are found in Antarctica .
Fossils are used to determine the ages of rock layers .
Index fossils are of organisms that lived over a wide area .
An index fossil allows a scientist to determine the age of the rock it is in .
Trilobite fossils , as shown in Figure 11.5 , are common index fossils .
Rock layers containing trilobite fossils must be that age .
Different species of trilobite fossils can be used to narrow the age even more .
The study of rock strata is called stratigraphy .
The laws of stratigraphy can help scientists understand Earths past .
The laws of stratigraphy are usually credited to a geologist from Denmark named Nicolas Steno .
Superposition refers to the position of rock layers and their relative ages .
Relative age means age in comparison with other rocks , either younger or older .
New rock layers are always deposited on top of existing rock layers .
You can see an example in Figure 11.7 .
Rock layers extend laterally , or out to the sides .
Look at the Grand Canyon in Figure 11.8 .
The matching rock layers were deposited at the same time , so they are the same age .
Sediments were deposited in ancient seas in horizontal , or flat , layers .
Rock layers may have another rock cutting across them , like the igneous rock in Figure 11.9 .
The cut rock layers are older than the rock that cuts across them .
Geologists can learn a lot about Earths history by studying sedimentary rock layers .
Hutton determined that the rocks were deposited over time .
Hutton knew that deposition and erosion are very slow .
He realized that for both to occur would take an extremely long time .
It meant there was enough time for life to evolve gradually .
A gap in the sequence of rock layers is called an unconformity .
Look at the rock layers in Figure 11.10 .
They show a feature called Huttons unconformity .
The unconformity was discovered by James Hutton in the 1700s .
Hutton saw that the lower rock layers are very old .
Hutton thought that the intermediate rock layers eroded away before the more recent rock layers were deposited .
When rock layers are in the same place , its easy to give them relative ages .
What evidence is used to match rock layers in different places ?
Some rock layers extend over a very wide area .
These distinctive rocks are matched by similar white cliffs in France , Belgium , Holland , Germany , and Denmark -LRB- see Figure 11.11 -RRB- .
It is important that this chalk layer goes across the English Channel .
The rock is so soft that the Channel Tunnel connecting England and France was carved into it !
Like index fossils , key beds are used to match rock layers .
For example , a key bed from around the time that the dinosaurs went extinct is very important .
A thin layer of clay was deposited over much of Earths surface .
This unusual clay layer has been used to match rock up layers all over the world .
It also led to the hypothesis that a giant asteroid struck Earth and caused the dinosaurs to go extinct .
Index fossils are commonly used to match rock layers in different places .
Earth formed 4.5 billion years ago .
Geologists divide this time span into smaller periods .
Many of the divisions mark major events in life history .
Divisions in Earth history are recorded on the geologic time scale .
For example , the Cretaceous ended when the dinosaurs went extinct .
The Jurassic Period is named for the Jura Mountains in France and Switzerland , for example .
To create the geologic time scale , geologists correlated rock layers .
Stenos laws were used to determine the relative ages of rocks .
The early geologic time scale could only show the order of events .
The discovery of radioactivity in the late 1800s changed that .
Scientists could determine the exact age of some rocks in years .
For example , the Jurassic began about 200 million years ago .
The largest blocks of time on the geologic time scale are called eons .
Eons are split into eras .
Each era is divided into periods .
Periods may be further divided into epochs .
Geologists may just use early or late .
The geologic time scale may include illustrations of how life on Earth has changed .
Major events on Earth may also be shown .
During this eon , rocks contain visible fossils .
The Cenozoic Era means new life .
The Cenozoic is sometimes called the Age of Mammals .
Before the Cenozoic came the Mesozoic and Paleozoic .
This is the age of reptiles , when dinosaurs ruled the planet .
Like other unstable isotopes , carbon-14 breaks down , or decays .
For carbon-14 decay , each carbon-14 atom loses an alpha particle .
In 5730 years , half of it decays .
This leaves 50 grams of carbon-14 .
This is illustrated in Figure 11.17 .
The decay of an unstable isotope to a stable element occurs at a constant rate .
The decay rate is measured in a unit called the half-life .
The rate of decay of unstable isotopes can be used to estimate the absolute ages of fossils and rocks .
This type of dating is called radiometric dating .
A living thing takes in carbon-14 -LRB- along with stable carbon-12 -RRB- .
So carbon - 14 dating is useful for specimens younger than 50,000 years old .
Carbon-14 dating is also limited to the remains of once-living things .
To date rocks , scientists use other radioactive isotopes .
As the carbon-14 decays , it is replaced with more carbon-14 .
That includes carbon-14 .
The carbon-14 that is in its body continues to decay .
So the organism contains less and less carbon-14 as time goes on .
We can estimate the amount of carbon-14 that has decayed by measuring the amount of carbon-14 to carbon-12 .
With this information , we can tell how long ago the organism died .
The isotopes in Table 11.1 are used to date igneous rocks .
Which of these isotopes could be used to date a rock that formed half a million years ago ?
Our solar system began about 5 billion years ago .
The Sun , planets and other solar system objects all formed at about the same time .
The cloud contracted and began to spin .
As it contracted , its temperature and pressure increased .
The cloud spun faster , and formed into a disk .
Scientists think the solar system at that time looked like these disk-shaped objects in the Orion Nebula -LRB- Figure
It was so hot that nuclear fusion reactions began .
In these reactions hydrogen fuses to make helium .
Our Sun became a star !
Material in the disk surrounding the Sun collided .
Small particles collided and became rocks .
Rocks collided and became boulders .
Eventually planets formed from the material -LRB- Figure 12.2 -RRB- .
Material at a similar distances from the Sun collided together to form each of the planets .
Earth grew from material in its part of space .
Earth formed like the other planets .
Different materials in its region of space collided .
In between the crust and the core is Earths mantle , made of solid rock .
Eventually the material made a planet .
All of the collisions caused Earth to heat up .
The molten material separated into layers .
Gravity pulled the denser material into the center .
The lighter elements rose to the surface -LRB- Figure 12.4 -RRB- .
Because the material separated , Earths core is made mostly of iron .
Earths crust is made mostly of lighter materials .
Asteroids flew around , sometimes striking the planets .
An asteroid the size of Mars smashed into Earth .
The huge amount of energy from the impact melted most of Earth .
Material from both Earth and the asteroid was thrown out into orbit .
Over time , this material smashed together to form our Moon .
This means that the collision happened about 70 million years after Earth formed .
An atmosphere is the gases that surround a planet .
The gases came from two sources .
Volcanoes spewed gases into the air .
Comets carried in ices from outer space .
These ices warmed and became gases .
Earths atmosphere slowly cooled .
Once it was cooler , water vapor could condense .
Liquid water could fall to Earths surface as rain .
Over millions of years water collected to form the oceans .
Water began to cycle on Earth as water evaporated from the oceans and returned again as rainfall .
More than 4 billion years ago , continental crust appeared .
The first continents were very small compared with those today .
Continents grow when microcontinents , or small continents , collide with each other or with a larger continent .
Oceanic island arcs also collide with continents to make them grow .
There are times in Earth history when all of the continents came together to form a supercontinent .
Supercontinents come together and then break apart .
The supercontinent before Pangaea is called Rodinia .
The supercontinent came together about 1.1 billion years ago .
Scientists think that three supercontinents came before Rodina , making five so far in Earth history .
Plate tectonics likely moved very quickly .
The remnants of these early rocks are now seen in the ancient cores of the continents .
But scientists use a variety of ways to figure out what this early life was like .
Life probably began in the oceans .
No one knows exactly how or when .
The cells needed to use these nutrients to live and grow .
The cells also needed to be able to make copies of themselves .
Eventually conditions on Earth became less violent .
The first organisms were made of only one cell -LRB- Figure 12.6 -RRB- .
Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a cell membrane , but they do not have a nucleus .
The cells got their nutrients directly from the water .
Early cells took nutrients from the water .
Eventually the nutrients would have become less abundant .
This made the environment able to support more complex life forms .
Organisms could make their own food from sunlight and inorganic molecules .
That first oxygen combined with iron to create iron oxide .
Later on , the oxygen entered the atmosphere .
Some of the oxygen in the atmosphere became ozone .
The ozone layer formed to protect Earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation .
Eukaryotes evolved about 2 billion years ago .
Organelles within a eukaryote can perform certain functions .
Eukaryotes were better able to live and so became the dominant life form .
For life to become even more complex , multicellular organisms needed to evolve .
Toward the end of the Precambrian , the Ediacara Fauna evolved -LRB- Figure 12.8 -RRB- .
These are the fossils discovered by Walcott in the introduction to the next section .
The Ediacara fauna seem to have died out .
Other multicellular organisms appeared in the Phanerozoic .
Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms -LRB- H2 -RRB- and one oxygen atom -LRB- O -RRB- .
Water is one of the few substances that exists on Earth in all three states of matter .
Water occurs as a gas , a liquid and a solid .
You may go ice skating on a pond covered with solid water ice in the winter .
Earth is often called the water planet .
Glaciers cover the peaks of some tall mountains .
For example , the Cascades Mountains in North America and the Alps Mountains in Europe are capped with ice .
Ice caps cover vast areas of Antarctica and Greenland .
Chunks of ice frequently break off ice caps .
They form icebergs that float in the oceans .
If astronauts see Earth from space , this is how it looks .
Notice how blue the planet appears .
Thats because oceans cover much of Earths surface .
Water is also found in the clouds that rise above the planet .
Most freshwater is frozen in ice caps and glaciers .
The next time you take a drink of water , think about this .
Water is recycled through the water cycle .
The water cycle is powered by energy from the Sun .
Water keeps changing state as it goes through the water cycle .
This means that it can be a solid , liquid , or gas .
In transpiration , plants release water vapor through their leaves .
This water vapor rises into the atmosphere .
As air rises higher into the atmosphere , it cools .
Cool air can hold less water vapor than warm air .
So some of the water vapor condenses into water droplets .
Water droplets may form clouds .
Precipitation is water that falls from clouds to Earths surface .
Water droplets in clouds fall to Earth when they become too large to stay aloft .
The water falls as rain if the air is warm .
How does water change state ?
If the air is cold , the water may freeze and fall as snow , sleet , or hail .
Most precipitation falls into the oceans .
Runoff is precipitation that flows over the surface of the land .
This water may travel to a river , lake , or ocean .
Runoff may pick up fertilizer and other pollutants and deliver them to the water body where it ends up .
In this way , runoff may pollute bodies of water .
Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground .
Some of the water may seep deep under - ground .
Some may stay in the soil , where plants can absorb it with their roots .
In all these ways , water keeps cycling .
Maybe a water molecule that you drink today once quenched the thirst of a dinosaur .
Energy from the Sun causes water to evaporate .
Most evaporation is from the oceans because they cover so much area .
The water vapor rises into the atmosphere .
Transpiration is like evaporation because it changes liquid water to water vapor .
A waterfall tumbles down a mountainside .
A river slowly meanders through a broad valley .
A stream is a body of freshwater that flows downhill in a channel .
The channel of a stream has a bottom , or bed , and sides called banks .
Any size body of flowing water can be called a stream .
Usually , though , a large stream is called a river .
These features are shown in -LRB- Figure 13.5 -RRB- .
Small streams often flow into bigger streams or rivers .
The small streams are called tributaries .
The area of land that is flooded is called the floodplain .
The floodplain may be very wide where the river flows over a nearly flat surface .
A river flowing over a floodplain may wear away broad curves .
These curves are called meanders .
The source might be a spring , where water flows out of the ground .
A stream or river probably ends when it flows into a body of water , such as a lake or an ocean .
A stream ends at its mouth .
As the water flows into the body of water , it slows down and drops the sediment it was carrying .
The sediment may build up to form a delta .
All of the land drained by a river system is called its basin , or watershed .
One river systems basin is separated from another river systems basin by a divide .
The divide is created by the highest points between the two river basins .
Precipitation that falls within a river basin always flows toward that river .
Precipitation that falls on the other side of the divide flows toward a different river .
Figure 13.6 shows the major river basins in the U.S. . You can watch an animation of water flowing through a river basin at this link : http://trashfree.org/btw/graphics/watershed_anim.gif
After a heavy rain , you may find puddles of water standing in low spots .
The same principle explains why water collects in ponds and lakes .
They lie between the U.S. and Canada , as shown in Figure 13.7 .
Water travels downhill , so a depression in the ground fills with standing water .
The water in a large lake may be so deep that sunlight can not penetrate all the way to the bottom .
Thats because plants need sunlight for photosynthesis .
Ponds and lakes may get their water from several sources .
Some falls directly into them as precipitation .
Some enters as runoff and some from streams and rivers .
Water leaves ponds and lakes through evaporation and also as outflow .
The depression that allows water to collect to form a lake may come about in a variety of ways .
A glacial lake forms when a glacier scrapes a large hole in the ground .
When the glacier melts , the water fills the hole and forms a lake .
Over time , water enters the lake from the sources mentioned above as well .
Other lakes are crater lakes or rift lakes , which are pictured in Figure 13.8 .
Crater lakes form when volcanic eruptions create craters that fill with water .
Rift lakes form when movements of tectonic plates create low places that fill with water .
Some of Earths freshwater is found in wetlands .
A wetland is an area that is covered with water , or at least has very soggy soil , during all or part of the year .
Certain species of plants thrive in wetlands , and they are rich ecosystems .
Freshwater wetlands are usually found at the edges of steams , rivers , ponds , or lakes .
Wetlands can also be found at the edges of seas .
Wetlands vary in how wet they are and how much of the year they are soaked .
Wetlands also vary in the kinds of plants that live in them .
This depends mostly on the climate where the wetland is found .
Types of wetlands include marshes , swamps , and bogs .
A swamp is a wetland that may or may not be covered with water but is always soggy .
People used to think that wetlands were useless .
Many wetlands were filled in with rocks and soil to create lands that were then developed with roads , golf courses , and buildings .
During hurricanes and other extreme weather , wetlands reduce the risk of floods .
Although the rate has slowed , wetlands are still being destroyed today .
Laws have been passed to help protect them .
Because so much wetland area has been lost , many of these species are endangered .
Wetlands purify water .
A flood occurs when so much water enters a stream or river that it overflows its banks .
Flood waters from a river are shown in Figure 13.10 .
Like this flood , many floods are caused by very heavy rains .
Floods may also occur when deep snow melts quickly in the spring .
Floods are a natural part of the water cycle , but they can cause a lot of damage .
In 1939 , millions of people died in a flood in China .
Although freshwater is needed to grow crops and just to live , too much freshwater in the same place at once can be deadly .
Freshwater below Earths surface is called groundwater .
Since water can move through this rock it is permeable .
Eventually , the water reaches a layer of rock that is not porous and so is impermeable .
Water stops moving downward when it reaches this layer of rock .
Look at the diagram in Figure 13.11 .
The top layer is not saturated ; it is not full of water .
The top of the saturated rock layer in Figure 13.11 is called the water table .
Instead , it rises or falls , depending on how much water seeps down from the surface .
An underground layer of rock that is saturated with groundwater is called an aquifer .
A diagram of an aquifer is shown in Figure 13.12 .
Aquifers are generally found in porous rock , such as sandstone .
The water that enters the aquifer is called recharge .
Many aquifers are used by people for freshwater .
However , an aquifer close to the surface is also more likely to become polluted .
Pollutants can seep down through porous rock in recharge water .
An aquifer that is used by people may not be recharged as quickly as its water is removed .
The water table may lower and the aquifer may even run dry .
If this happens , the ground above the aquifer may sink .
This is likely to damage any homes or other structures built above the aquifer .
As you can see from Figure 13.13 , this aquifer lies beneath parts of eight U.S. states .
This is a major farming area , and much of the water is used to irrigate crops .
The water in this aquifer is being used up ten times faster than it is recharged .
If this continues , what might happen to the Ogallala aquifer ?
The top of an aquifer may be high enough in some places to meet the surface of the ground .
This often happens on a slope .
The water flows out of the ground and creates a spring .
One of the largest springs in the world is Big Spring in Missouri , seen in Figure 13.14 .
Thats what happens to the water that flows out of Big Spring in Missouri .
If the water from a spring cant flow downhill , it may spread out to form a pond or lake instead .
Lake George in New York State , which is pictured in Figure 13.15 , is a spring-fed lake .
The lake basin was carved by a glacier .
Some springs have water that contains minerals .
Groundwater dissolves minerals out of the rock as it seeps through the pores .
The water in some springs is hot because it is heated by hot magma .
Grand Prismatic Spring , shown in Figure 13.16 , is a hot mineral spring .
Dissolved minerals give its water a bright blue color .
The edge of the spring is covered with thick orange mats of bacteria .
The bacteria use the minerals in the hot water to make food .
Heated groundwater may become trapped in spaces within rocks .
Pressure builds up as more water seeps into the spaces .
When the pressure becomes great enough , the water bursts out of the ground at a crack or weak spot .
This is called a geyser .
When the water erupts from the ground , the pressure is released .
This leads to another eruption .
You can see a picture of it in Figure 13.17 .
The geyser erupts faithfully every 90 minutes , day after day .
Most groundwater does not flow out of an aquifer as a spring or geyser .
So to use the water thats stored in an aquifer people must go after it .
The well pictured in Figure 13.19 is an example of this type of well .
A hand-cranked pulley is used to lift the bucket of water to the surface .
A well is a hole that is dug or drilled through the ground down to an aquifer .
This is illustrated in Figure 13.18 .
People have depended on water from wells for thousands of years .
To bring water to the surface takes energy because the force of gravity must be overcome .
Today , many wells use electricity to pump water to the surface .
However , in some places , water is still brought to the surface the old-fashioned way with human labor .
When Earth formed 4.6 billion years ago , it would not have been called the water planet .
Early Earth was too hot for liquid water to exist .
Earths early years were spent as molten rock and metal .
Over time , Earth cooled .
The surface hardened to become solid rock .
Volcanic eruptions , like the one in Figure 14.1 , brought lava and gases to the surface .
More water vapor came from asteroids and comets that crashed into Earth .
As Earth cooled still more , the water vapor condensed to make Earths first liquid water .
At last , the oceans could start to form .
Earths crust consists of many tectonic plates that move over time .
Due to plate tectonics , the continents changed their shapes and positions during Earth history .
These oceans are now known as the Pacific , Atlantic , Indian , and Arctic Oceans .
About 250 million years ago , there was one huge land mass known as Pangaea .
There was also one huge ocean called Panthalassa .
By 180 million years ago , Pangaea began to break up .
The continents started to drift apart .
They slowly moved to where they are today .
The movement of the continents caused Panthalassa to break into smaller oceans .
Oceans cover more than 70 percent of Earths surface and hold 97 percent of its surface water .
The oceans affect the atmosphere , climate , and living things .
Sunlight heats water near the sea surface , as shown in Figure 14.3 .
By absorbing carbon dioxide , the oceans help control global warming .
The water vapor rises into the air , where it may form clouds and precipitation .
Precipitation provides the freshwater needed by plants and other living things .
Ocean water also absorbs gases from the atmosphere .
Oxygen is needed by living things in the oceans .
Much of the carbon dioxide sinks to the bottom of the seas .
Warm water from the equator mixes with cold water from the poles .
The mixing of warm and cold water makes the water temperature moderate .
Temperatures might plunge hundreds of degrees below freezing in the winter .
Life as we know it could not exist on Earth without the oceans .
Thats because land near an ocean is influenced by the temperature of the oceans .
As a result , oceans never get as hot or as cold as land .
Water flows through all the worlds oceans .
The oceans provide a home to many living things .
In fact , a greater number of organisms lives in the oceans than on land .
Ocean water is salty because water dissolves minerals out of rocks .
This happens whenever water flows over or through rocks .
Much of this water and its minerals flow in rivers that end up in the oceans .
Minerals dissolved in water form salts .
When the water evaporates , it leaves the salts behind .
-LRB- Hint : More water evaporates when the water is warm . -RRB-
By mass , salts make up about 3.5 percent of ocean water .
Figure 14.5 shows the most common minerals in ocean water .
The amount of salts in ocean water varies from place to place .
Thats because river water contains less salt than ocean water .
Another is the amount of sunlight that reaches the water .
These conditions depend mainly on two factors : distance from shore and depth of water .
Oceans are divided into zones based on these two factors .
The ocean floor makes up another zone .
Figure 14.6 shows all the ocean zones .
There are three main ocean zones based on distance from shore .
Distance from shore influences how many nutrients are in the water .
Most nutrients are washed into ocean water from land .
Therefore , water closer to shore tends to have more nutrients .
Living things need nutrients .
So distance from shore also influences how many organisms live in the water .
Two main zones based on depth of water are the photic zone and aphotic zone .
At great depths , life becomes very difficult .
The pressure is so great that only specially adapted creatures can live there .
The deeper you go , the darker the water gets .
Thats because sunlight can not penetrate very far under water .
Sunlight is needed for photosynthesis .
So the depth of water determines whether photosynthesis is possible .
Water also gets colder as you go deeper .
The weight of the water pressing down from above increases as well .
Most ocean waves are caused by winds .
A wave that travels across miles of ocean is traveling energy , not water .
Ocean waves transfer energy from wind through water .
The energy of a wave may travel for thousands of miles .
The water itself moves very little .
Figure 14.9 shows how water molecules move when a wave goes by .
Figure 14.9 also shows how the size of waves is measured .
A hurricane is a storm that forms over the ocean .
Its winds may blow more than 150 miles per hour !
The winds also travel over long distances and may last for many days .
Wave height is also called amplitude .
The size of an ocean wave depends on how fast , over how great a distance , and how long the wind blows .
Some of the biggest waves occur with hurricanes .
Figure 14.10 shows what happens to waves near shore .
As waves move into shallow water , they start to touch the bottom .
Soon the waves slow down and pile up .
Not all waves are caused by winds .
A shock to the ocean can also send waves through water .
A tsunami is a wave or set of waves that is usually caused by an earthquake .
Usually tsunami waves travel through the ocean unnoticed .
But when they reach the shore they become enormous .
Figure 14.11 shows the damage caused by a tsunami in the Indian Ocean in 2004 .
High tides occur when the water reaches its highest level in a day .
Low tides occur when the water reaches its lowest level in a day .
Tides keep cycling from high to low and back again .
In most places the water level rises and falls twice a day .
This is called the tidal range .
With water bulging on two sides of Earth , theres less water left in between .
This creates low tides on the other two sides of the planet .
Although the gravity pulls the land , only the water can move .
As a result : Water on the side of Earth facing the Moon is pulled hardest by the Moons gravity .
This causes a bulge of water on that side of Earth .
Earth itself is pulled harder by the Moons gravity than is the ocean on the side of Earth opposite the Moon .
This creates another high tide .
The Suns gravity also pulls on Earth and its oceans .
Neap tides occur during the first and third quarters of the Moon .
Their gravity pulls on the oceans in different directions so the highs and lows are not as great .
This animation shows the effect of the Moon and Sun on the tides :
The Suns gravity strengthens or weakens the Moons influence on tides .
Figure 14.14 shows the position of the Moon relative to the Sun at different times during the month .
The positions of the Moon and Sun relative to each other determines how the Sun affects tides .
This creates spring tides or neap tides .
Their gravitational pull combines to cause very high and very low tides .
A current is a stream of moving water that flows through the ocean .
Surface currents are caused mainly by winds , but not the winds that blow and change each day .
Surface currents are caused by the major wind belts that blow in the same direction all the time .
The major surface currents are shown in Figure 14.15 .
They flow in a clockwise direction in the Northern Hemi - sphere .
Winds and surface currents tend to move from the hot equator north or south toward the much cooler poles .
But Earth is spinning on its axis underneath the wind and water as they move .
The Earth rotates from west to east .
As a result , winds and currents actually end up moving toward the northeast or southeast .
This effect of Earths rotation on the direction of winds and currents is called the Coriolis effect .
The Gulf Stream , for example , carries warm water from near the equator up the eastern coast of North America .
Look at the map in Figure 14.16 .
It shows how the Gulf Stream warms both the water and land along the coast .
Currents also flow deep below the surface of the ocean .
Deep currents are caused by differences in density at the top and bottom .
Sea ice grows in this cold water , but ice is created from fresh water .
The salt is left behind in the seawater .
This cold , salty water is very dense , so it sinks to the bottom of the North Atlantic .
Downwelling can take place in other places where surface water becomes very dense -LRB- see Figure 14.17 -RRB- .
When water sinks it pushes deep water along at the bottom of the ocean .
This water circulates through all of the ocean basins in deep currents .
Density is defined as the amount of mass per unit of volume .
What can make water more dense ?
Water becomes more dense when it is colder and when it has more salt .
Sometimes deep ocean water rises to the surface .
This is called upwelling .
Strong winds blow surface water away from shore .
This allows deeper water to flow to the surface and take its place .
When water comes up from the deep , it brings a lot of nutrients with it .
Over time , dead organisms and other organic matter settle to the bottom water and collect .
The nutrient-rich water that comes to the surface by upwelling supports many living things .
Scientists study the ocean floor in various ways .
Scientists or their devices may actually travel to the ocean floor .
If you did , thats because the sound waves bounced off a hard surface and back to you .
Figure 14.20 shows an example of this type of map .
The same principle explains how sonar works .
A ship on the surface sends sound waves down to the ocean floor .
The sound waves bounce off the ocean floor and return to the surface , like an echo .
Figure 14.19 show how this happens .
Sonar can be used to measure how deep the ocean is .
A device records the time it takes sound waves to travel from the surface to the ocean floor and back again .
Sound waves travel through water at a known speed .
Once scientists know the travel time of the wave , they can calculate the distance to the ocean floor .
Only a specially designed vehicle can venture beneath the sea surface .
But only very special vehicles can reach the ocean floor .
Alvin has been essential for developing a scientific understanding the worlds oceans .
Today , remote-control vehicles , called remotely operated vehicles -LRB- ROVs -RRB- go to the deepest ocean floor .
However , they carry devices that record many measurements .
Three are described here and pictured in Figure 14.21 : In 1960 , scientists used the submersible Trieste to travel into the Mariana Trench .
Making humans safe at such depths costs a lot of money .
In 2012 , the film director , James Cameron , dove to the bottom of the Mariana Trench by himself in a submersible that he had built for the purpose .
The vehicle named Alvin was developed soon after Trieste .
The submersible has made over 4,000 dives deep into the ocean .
People can stay underwater for up to 9 hours .
Scientists have learned a lot about the ocean floor .
Trenches occur where one tectonic plate subducts under another .
Seamounts that rise above the water surface are known as islands .
There are many seamounts dotting the seafloor .
The mid-ocean ridge is a mountain range that runs through all the worlds oceans .
The major features on the ocean floor are described below .
It forms where tectonic plates pull apart .
Magma erupts through the ocean floor to make new seafloor .
The magma hardens to create the ridge .
The continental slope lies between the continental shelf and the abyssal plain .
The resources include both living and nonliving things .
The ocean floor is home to many species of living things .
Some from shallow water are used by people for food .
For example , certain bacteria on the ocean floor produce chemicals that fight cancer .
Large drills on floating oil rigs must be used to reach them .
Some settle down from the water above .
Some are released in hot water through vents , or cracks , in the seafloor .
The minerals in hot water settle out and form metallic chimneys , as in Figure 14.23 .
This means that mining them would be too expensive and not worth the effort .
Some types of minerals form balls called nodules .
As many as 500 billion tons of nodules lie on the ocean floor !
An oil rig explosion caused a massive oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 .
Oil poured into the water for several months .
The oil caused great harm to habitats and living things , both in the water and on the coast .
The oil spill also hurt the economy of Gulf Coast states .
When you think of life in the ocean , do you think of fish ?
Plankton make up one of three major groups of marine life .
Figure 14.24 shows the three groups .
Plankton are living things that float in the water .
Most plankton are too small to see with the unaided eye .
Some examples are shown in Figure 14.25 .
Plankton are unable to move on their own .
Nekton are living things that swim through the water .
Fish have fins and streamlined bodies to help them swim .
Fish also have gills to take oxygen from the water .
Benthos are living things on the ocean floor .
Many benthic organisms attach themselves to rocks and stay in one place .
The hot water contains chemicals that some specialized bacteria can use to make food .
Tubeworms let the bacteria live inside them .
The bacteria get protection and the tubeworms get some of the food .
Some benthic organisms burrow into sediments for food or protection .
Benthic animals may crawl over the ocean floor .
Examples of benthos include clams and worms .
Figure 14.27 shows two other examples .
Some benthos live near vents on the deep ocean floor .
Scalding hot water pours out of the vents .
Figure 14.29 shows a marine food chain .
Phytoplankton form the base of the food chain .
They break down chemicals to make food .
The nutrients can be used again to make food .
Decomposers in the oceans include bacteria and worms .
They use sunlight and nutrients to make food by photosynthesis .
Larger organisms eat the small zooplankton .
Larger predators eat these consumers .
In an unusual relationship , some enormous whales depend on plankton for their food .
The bacteria that make food from chemicals are also primary producers .
The answer can be summed up in one word : energy .
Energy is defined as the ability to do work .
Doing anything takes energy .
Energy can move from one place to another .
The Suns energy heats the planet and the air around it .
The Sun gives off energy in tiny packets called photons .
Heat energy is transferred in three ways : radiation , conduction , and convection .
Energy can travel as waves through air or empty space .
The Suns energy travels through space by radiation .
After sunlight heats the planets surface , some heat radiates back into the atmosphere .
In conduction , heat is transferred from molecule to molecule by contact .
Warmer molecules vibrate faster than cooler ones .
Conduction happens mainly in the lower atmosphere .
Different parts of Earths surface receive different amounts of sunlight .
The Suns rays strike Earths surface most directly at the equator .
This focuses the rays on a small area .
Near the poles , the Suns rays strike the surface at a slant .
This spreads the rays over a wide area .
The more focused the rays are , the more energy an area receives and the warmer it is .
When sunlight heats Earths surface , some of the heat radiates back into the atmosphere .
Some of this heat is absorbed by gases in the atmosphere .
This is the greenhouse effect , and it helps to keep Earth warm .
The greenhouse effect allows Earth to have temperatures that can support life .
Gases that absorb heat in the atmosphere are called greenhouse gases .
Human actions have increased the levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere .
This is shown in Figure 15.11 .
The added gases have caused a greater greenhouse effect .
How do you think this affects Earths temperature ?
In some layers of the atmosphere , the temperature decreases .
Refer to this figure as you read about the layers below .
In it , temperature decreases with altitude .
The troposphere gets some of its heat directly from the Sun .
The surface is heated by the Sun and some of that heat radiates back into the air .
This makes the temperature higher near the surface than at higher altitudes .
Look at the troposphere in Figure 15.12 .
Even so , this layer holds 75 percent of all the gas molecules in the atmosphere .
Warm air is less dense than cool air , so it rises higher in the troposphere .
This starts a convection cell .
Convection mixes the air in the troposphere .
All of Earths weather takes place in the troposphere .
This happens when air is cooler close to the ground than it is above .
This is called a temperature inversion .
At the top of the troposphere is a thin layer of air called the tropopause .
This layer acts as a barrier .
It prevents cool air in the troposphere from mixing with warm air in the stratosphere .
The layer rises to about 50 kilometers -LRB- 31 miles -RRB- above the surface .
Air temperature in the stratosphere layer increases with altitude .
The stratosphere gets most of its heat from the Sun .
As a result , there is little mixing of air in this layer .
The stratosphere contains a layer of ozone gas .
Ozone consists of three oxygen atoms -LRB- O3 -RRB- .
The ozone layer absorbs high-energy UV radiation .
As you can see in Figure 15.14 , UV radiation splits the ozone molecule .
The split creates an oxygen molecule -LRB- O2 -RRB- and an oxygen atom -LRB- O -RRB- .
This split releases heat that warms the stratosphere .
By absorbing UV radiation , ozone also protects Earths surface .
At the top of the stratosphere is a thin layer called the stratopause .
Temperature decreases with altitude in this layer .
This means that there is little matter to absorb the Suns rays and heat the air .
Meteors burn as they fall through the mesosphere .
The space rocks experience friction with the gas molecules .
The friction makes the meteors get very hot .
Many meteors burn up completely in the mesosphere .
The International Space Station orbits Earth in this layer as in Figure 15.16 .
Temperature increases with altitude in the thermosphere .
The molecules absorb the Suns energy and are heated up .
But there are so very few gas molecules , that the air still feels very cold .
Molecules in the thermosphere gain or lose electrons .
They then become charged particles called ions .
Storms on the Sun energize the ions and make them light up .
In the Northern Hemisphere , the lights are called the northern lights , or aurora borealis .
The exosphere has no real upper limit ; it just gradually merges with outer space .
Earths gravity is so weak in the exosphere that gas molecules sometimes just float off into space .
Major climate types are based on temperature and precipitation .
These two factors determine what types of plants can grow in an area .
Animals and other living things depend on plants .
So each climate is associated with certain types of living things .
A major type of climate and its living things make up a biome .
As you read about the major climate types below , find them on the map in Figure 17.9 .
Tropical climates are found around the equator .
As youd expect , these climates have warm temperatures year round .
Tropical wet climates occur at or very near the equator .
Tropical rainforests grow in this type of climate .
Tropical wet and dry climates occur between 5 and 20 latitude and receive less rainfall .
Most of the rain falls in a single season .
Few trees can withstand the long dry season , so the main plants are grasses -LRB- see Figure 17.10 -RRB- .
Dry climates receive very little rainfall .
Steppes occur at higher latitudes than deserts .
This makes them even drier .
Most occur between about 15 and 30 latitude .
This is where dry air sinks to the surface in the global circulation cells .
Deserts receive less than 25 centimeters -LRB- 10 inches -RRB- of rain per year .
Other dry climates get a little more precipitation .
These climates vary in how much rain they get and when the rain falls .
Dense fir forests grow in this climate .
Humid subtropical climates are found on the eastern sides of continents between about 20 and 40 latitude .
Pine and oak forests grow in this climate .
Mediterranean climates are found on the western coasts of continents .
Most of the rain falls in the winter , and summers are dry .
Marine west coast climates are also found on the western coasts of continents .
Continental climates are found in inland areas .
Precipitation is moderate , and it falls year round .
Deciduous trees grow in this climate .
Subarctic climates are found between 60 and 70 north latitude .
Little precipitation falls , and most of it falls during the summer .
Conifer forests grow in this climate -LRB- see Figure 17.13 -RRB- .
All of their inland areas are close enough to a coast to be affected by the ocean !
Humid continental climates are found between 40 and 60 north latitude .
Polar climates are found near the North and South Poles .
Ice caps are areas covered with thick ice year round .
Ice caps are found only in Greenland and Antarctica .
What little snow falls usually stays on the ground .
Permafrost is layer of ground below the surface that is always frozen , even in the summer .
Only small plants , such as mosses , can grow in this climate .
Alpine tundra climates occur at high altitudes at any latitude .
The south-facing side of the hill gets more direct sunlight than the north side of a hill .
This gives the south side a warmer microclimate .
Earths climate has changed many times through Earths history .
Picture in your mind dinosaurs roaming the land .
But ice ages also occurred many times in the past .
This causes glaciers to spread to lower latitudes .
Scientists think that ice ages occurred at least six times over the last billion years alone .
How do scientists learn about Earths past climates ?
The last major ice age took place in the Pleistocene .
This epoch lasted from 2 million to 14,000 years ago .
But glaciers covered much of the Northern Hemisphere .
Humans lived during this ice age .
Since the Pleistocene , Earths temperature has risen .
Since the mid 1800s , Earth has warmed up quickly .
The 14 hottest years on record have all occurred since 1900 .
Eight of them have occurred since 1998 !
This is what is usually meant by global warming .
Natural processes caused earlier climate changes .
Several natural processes may affect Earths temperature .
This could lower Earths temperature .
A large asteroid hitting Earth would throw a lot of dust into the air .
This could block sunlight and cool the planet .
Earth also wobbles on its axis of rotation .
The planet also changes the tilt on its axis .
These changes can affect Earths temperature .
When the number of sunspots is high , the Sun gives off more energy than usual .
Still , there is little evidence for climate changing along with the sunspot cycle .
Plate movements cause continents to drift closer to the poles or the equator .
Ocean currents also shift when continents drift .
All these changes can affect Earths temperature .
Plate movements trigger volcanoes .
A huge eruption could spew so much gas and ash into the air that little sunlight would reach the surface for months or years .
Burning fossil fuels adds carbon dioxide to the atmosphere .
Its one of several that human activities add to the atmosphere .
An increase in greenhouse gases leads to greater greenhouse effect .
As Earth has gotten warmer , sea ice has melted .
This has raised the level of water in the oceans .
Figure 17.21 shows how much sea level has risen since 1880 .
Earths temperature will keep rising unless greenhouse gases are curbed .
This would cause sea level to rise even higher .
Millions of people would have to move inland .
Since the glacial periods of the Pleistocene , average temperature has risen about 4 C. Thats just 4 C from abundant ice to the moderate climate we have today .
How might a 5 C increase in temperature affect Earth in the future ?
Warming will affect the entire globe by the end of this century .
The map in Figure 17.22 shows the average temperature in the 2050s .
Where in the United States is the temperature increase the highest ?
As temperature rises , more sea ice will melt .
These terms refer to certain short-term changes in climate .
The changes are natural and occur in cycles .
This is shown in Figure 17.24 .
This causes the trade winds to change direction .
Some places get more rain than normal .
Other places get less .
This is shown in Figure 17.25 .
The warm water travels east across the equator , too .
This prevents upwelling .
The changes usually last a year or two .
La Nia generally follows El Nio .
Figure 17.26 shows what happens .
More cool water builds up in the western Pacific .
These changes can also affect climates worldwide .
Some scientists think that global warming is affecting the cycle of El Nio and La Nia .
These short-term changes seem to be cycling faster now than in the past .
You can see a lump of carbon in Figure 18.10 .
Carbon is incredibly important because of what it makes when it combines with many other elements .
Carbon can form a wide variety of substances .
For example , in the air , carbon combines with oxygen to form the gas carbon dioxide .
Both cycles are shown in Figure 18.11 .
Producers such as plants or algae use carbon dioxide in the air to make food .
The organisms combine carbon dioxide with water to make sugar .
Consumers get carbon when they eat producers or other consumers .
Living things get energy from food in a process called respiration .
This releases carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere .
Carbon from decaying organisms enters the ground .
Some carbon is stored in the soil .
Much of the carbon sinks to the bottom of the oceans , where it may stay for hundreds of years .
Some carbon may be stored underground for millions of years .
This will form fossil fuels .
When volcanoes erupt , carbon from the mantle is released as carbon dioxide into the air .
Producers take in the carbon dioxide to make food .
The oceans also play an important role in the carbon cycle .
Ocean water absorbs carbon dioxide from the air .
Human actions are influencing the carbon cycle .
Burning of fossil fuels releases the carbon dioxide that was stored in ancient plants .
Trees may be cut down for their wood , or they may be burned to clear the land for farming .
Burning wood releases more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere .
You can see how a tropical rainforest was cleared for farming in Figure 18.12 .
With forests shrinking , there are fewer trees to remove carbon dioxide from the air .
This makes the greenhouse effect even worse .
Living things also need nitrogen .
Decomposers release nitrogen into the air from dead organisms and their wastes .
Nitrogen must combine with other elements before producers can use it .
Nitrogen is one of the most important nutrients needed by plants .
Thats why most plant fertilizers contain nitrogen .
Since there is a lot of nitrogen it causes algae to grow out of control .
Figure 18.14 shows a pond covered with algae .
Algae may use up so much oxygen in the water that nothing else can grow .
Soon , even the algae die out .
Decomposers break down the dead tissue and use up all the oxygen in the water .
This creates a dead zone .
A dead zone is an area in a body of water where nothing grows because there is too little oxygen .
Adding fertilizer to soil allows more plants to grow .
Rain dissolves fertilizer in the soil .
Runoff carries it away .
The fertilizer ends up in bodies of water , from ponds to oceans .
A population usually grows when it has what it needs .
A single bacteria cell was added to a container of nutrients .
The bacteria divided every 30 minutes .
Assume the bacteria population keeps growing at this rate .
The letter r stands for the growth rate .
A population growing at this rate would double in size in just 35 years !
This means that the population is becoming smaller .
The growth rate equals the number of new members added to the population in a year for each 100 members already in the population .
The growth rate includes new members added to the population and old members removed from the population .
Deaths remove members from the population .
This means that the population is growing bigger .
This means that the population is growing by 2 individuals per year for every 100 members of the population .
A population cant keep growing bigger and bigger forever .
This maximum is called the carrying capacity .
When a population gets close to the carrying capacity , it usually grows more slowly .
When the population reaches the carrying capacity , it stops growing .
Then , in the 1800s , something happened to change all that .
The human population started to grow much faster .
The industrial revolution began in the late 1700s in Europe , North America , and a few other places .
These machines could quickly carry food long distances .
This made food shortages less likely .
Sewers were dug to carry away human wastes -LRB- see Figure 18.18 -RRB- .
With better food and less chance of disease , the death rate fell .
More children lived long enough to reach adulthood and have children of their own .
As the death rate fell , the birth rate stayed high for a while .
This caused rapid population growth .
In these places , the human population grew faster .
However , the birth rate in these countries has since fallen to a rate close to that of the low death rate .
These changes are called the demographic transition .
While there had always been a lot of births , the population grew because the death rate fell .
With more food , people were healthier and could live longer .
More recently , the death rate has fallen because of the availability of more food and medical advances : A green revolution began in the mid 1900s .
New methods and products increased how much food could be grown .
For example , chemicals were developed that killed weeds without harming crops .
Pesticides were developed that killed pests that destroyed crops .
Vaccinations were developed that could prevent many diseases -LRB- see Figure 18.19 -RRB- .
Antibiotics were discov - ered that could cure most infections caused by bacteria .
Together , these two advances saved countless lives .
Today in many countries , death rates have gone down but birth rates remain high .
This means that the population is growing .
Figure 18.20 shows the growth rates of human populations all over the world .
The growth of the human population has started to slow down .
Scientists think that the human population will peak at about 9 billion people .
Many other resources will run out sooner or later .
People are killing too many animals for food .
For example , some of the best fishing grounds in the oceans have almost no fish left .
People have destroyed many habitats .
For example , theyve drained millions of acres of wetlands .
As wetlands shrink , species go extinct .
People have allowed alien or invasive species - species originally from a different area - to invade new habitats .
They may drive native species extinct .
But some people think there are too many of us already .
Figure People themselves are also affected by the large size of the human population .
A minority of people use most of the worlds energy and other resources .
Supplying all those people with energy creates a lot of pollution .
For example , huge oil spills have killed millions of living things .
Burning fossil fuels pollutes the air .
This also increases causes global warming .
Is it possible for all the worlds people to live well and still protect the planet ?
Distribute resources fairly .
Conserve resources so they wont run out .
Love Canal gained worldwide attention in the late 1970s when the press started covering its story .
The story is outlined below and illustrated in Figure 19.9 .
The Love Canal disaster actually began back in the mid 1900s .
Chemicals started leaking from the barrels .
Chemicals seeped into basements .
Chemicals bubbled up to the surface of the ground .
In some places , plants wouldnt even grow on the soil .
People noticed bad smells .
Many got sick , especially the children .
Residents wanted to know if the old chemicals were the cause .
Starting in the early 1940s , a big chemical company put thousands of barrels of chemical waste into an old canal .
Finally , the soil was tested and was found to be contaminated with harmful chemicals .
Both can cause permanent damage to the human nervous system .
More than three decades later , much of Love Canal is still too contaminated to be safe for people .
Over the next 10 years , the company dumped almost 22,000 tons of chemicals into the ground !
In the early 1950s , the company covered over the barrels in the canal with soil .
The city needed the land in order to build an elementary school .
The company warned the city that toxic waste was buried there .
The school and hundreds of homes were also built over the old canal .
Love Canal opened peoples eyes to toxic waste burial .
They realized there must be other Love Canals all over the country .
The Superfund Act was passed in 1980 .
The law required that money be set aside for cleanup of toxic waste sites , like the Elizabeth Copper Mine in Vermont -LRB- see the far-right image in Figure 19.9 -RRB- .
The law also required safer disposal of hazardous waste in the future .
Love Canal highlighted the problem of pollution by hazardous waste .
Explosive waste is likely to explode .
The risk of explosion may be greater if the waste is mixed with other substances .
Table 19.1 shows some examples of hazardous waste .
Are any of these examples lurking around your home ?
Example Description Cars contain toxic fluids such as brake fluid .
This photo shows one way the fluids can end up in the ground .
Cars use gas and oil .
Batteries contain toxic and corrosive materials .
Electronics , such as old computers , contain toxic chem - icals .
They may be sent to landfills where the toxic materials end up in the ground .
Medical waste can contain many hazards : Human body fluids may cause disease ; old thermometers may contain toxic mercury ; and pharmaceuticals may be toxic to people and other living things .
Paints may spill on the ground or be thrown improperly in the trash .
Chemicals are applied to farm fields and lawns .
Toxic waste may cause cancer or birth defects in people .
Corrosive waste may cause burns or destroy other materials that it touches .
Flammable waste can burn easily .
Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste .
Thanks to the lessons of Love Canal , the U.S. now has laws requiring the safe disposal of hazardous waste .
Companies must ensure that hazardous waste is not allowed to enter the environment in dangerous amounts .
Cleaning products , lawn chemicals , paints , batteries , motor oil these are just some of the many hazardous materials that may be found in households .
You might think that a household doesnt produce enough hazardous waste to worry about .
For example , paint thinner that has been used to clean paint brushes can be strained and reused .
Always properly dispose of hazardous waste .
For example , let liquid waste evaporate before placing the container in the trash .
Proper disposal depends on the waste .
The labels also explain how to use the products safely .
Follow the instructions to protect yourself and the environment .
Most communities have centers for disposing of household hazardous waste -LRB- see Figure 19.11 -RRB- .
Do you know how to dispose of hazardous waste in your community ?
A city of just 50,000 people might produce more than 40 tons of hazardous waste each year !
Clearly , how households deal with hazardous waste matters .
Reduce , reuse , recycle , or properly dispose of the wastes .
To describe your location wherever you are on Earths surface , you could use a coordinate system .
You will learn about this type of grid when we discuss maps later in this chapter .
When studying Earths surface , scientists must be able to pinpoint a feature they are interested in .
Scientists and others have a system to describe the location of any feature .
Lines of latitude and longitude form a grid .
The grid is centered on a reference point .
We can describe the topography of a region by measuring the height or depth of that feature relative to sea level -LRB- Figure mountains , while others are more like small hills !
A topographic map shows the height , or elevation , of features in an area .
For example , Figure 2.5 shows the San Francisco Peaks in northern Arizona .
Features on the map include mountains , hills and lava flows .
If you take away the water in the oceans -LRB- Figure 2.6 -RRB- , Earth looks really different .
Landforms are introduced in this section but will be discussed more in later chapters .
Constructive forces cause landforms to grow .
Lava flowing into the ocean can build land outward .
Destructive forces may blow landforms apart .
A volcano blowing its top off is a destructive force .
Over millions of years , mountains are worn down by rivers and streams .
Constructive and destructive forces work together to create landforms .
Constructive forces create mountains and erosion may wear them away .
Mountains may wear away into a high flat area called a plateau , or a lower-lying plain .
Coastal plains are on the edge of a continent , where it meets the ocean .
They cut away at rock , forming river valleys -LRB- Figure 2.8 -RRB- .
Ocean basins extend from the edges of continents to the ocean floor and into deep trenches .
Because the continents are so old , a lot has happened to them !
The ocean basin begins where the ocean meets the land .
The continental margin begins at the shore and goes down to the ocean floor .
These ranges are connected so that they form huge ridge systems called mid-ocean ridges -LRB- Figure 2.11 -RRB- .
The mid-ocean ridges form from volcanic eruptions .
Lava from inside Earth breaks through the crust and creates the mountains .
The continental shelf usually goes out about 100 to 200 kilometers from the shore -LRB- Figure 2.9 -RRB- .
In some places , a large pile of sediments brought from rivers creates the continental rise .
The continental rise ends at the Besides seamounts , there are long , very tall -LRB- about 2 km -RRB- mountain ranges .
Look for the legend on the top left side of the map .
Names for bodies of water are also written in blue .
A line or scale of miles shows the distance represented on the map an inch or centimeter on the map represents a certain amount of distance -LRB- miles or kilometers -RRB- .
The legend explains other features and symbols on the map .
For this reason , a compass rose is not needed on most maps .
Black dots represent the cities .
The size of the dot represents the population of the city .
Red and brown lines show major roads that connect the cities .
Blue lines show rivers .
Their names are written in blue .
Some examples include : Political or geographic maps show the outlines and borders of states and/or countries .
You can easily carry a map around in your pocket or bag .
Maps are easy to use because they are flat or two-dimensional .
So , how do map makers represent a three-dimensional world on flat paper ?
Satellite view maps show terrains and vegetation forests , deserts , and mountains .
Relief maps show elevations of areas , but usually on a larger scale , such as the whole Earth , rather than a local area .
Topographic maps show detailed elevations of features on the map .
Climate maps show average temperatures and rainfall .
Precipitation maps show the amount of rainfall in different areas .
Weather maps show storms , air masses , and fronts .
Radar maps show storms and rainfall .
Geologic maps detail the types and locations of rocks found in an area .
In a small area , Earth looks flat , so it is not hard to make accurate maps of a small place .
There are two basic methods that the map maker uses in projections : The map maker slices the sphere in some way and unfolds it to make a flat map , like flattening out an orange peel .
The map maker can look at the sphere from a certain point and then translate this view onto a flat paper .
Lets look at a few commonly used projections .
When map makers want to map the round Earth on flat paper , they use projections .
To flatten out , the orange peel must rip and its shape must become distorted .
To wrap around object with flat paper requires lots of extra cuts and folds .
A projection is a way to represent Earths curved surface on flat paper -LRB- Figure 2.14 -RRB- .
Each uses a different way to change three dimensions into two dimensions .
In 1569 , Gerardus Mercator -LRB- 1512-1594 -RRB- -LRB- Figure 2.15 -RRB- figured out a way to make a flat map of our round world , called the Mercator projection -LRB- Figure 2.16 -RRB- .
Imagine wrapping the round , ball-shaped Earth with a big , flat piece of paper .
The shapes and sizes of continents become more stretched out near the poles .
Early sailors and navigators found the Mercator map useful because most explorations were located near the equator .
Many world maps still use the Mercator projection .
Landmasses or countries outside that zone get stretched out of shape .
Yet , on a Mercator projection , Greenland looks almost as big the United States .
Because Greenland is closer to the pole , the continents shape and size are greatly increased .
This makes it a good type of map for navigation .
However , because it is a flat map of a curved surface , a straight line on the map is not the shortest distance between the two points it connects .
The cylinder will touch Earth at its fattest part , the equator .
The equator is the imaginary line running horizontally around the middle of Earth .
If you shine a light from the inside of your model Earth out to the cylinder , the image projected onto the paper is a Mercator projection .
Where does the projection represent Earth best ?
Conic map projections use a cone shape to better represent regions near the poles -LRB- Figure 2.17 -RRB- .
Lets say you dont want to wrap a flat piece of paper around a round object ?
You could put a flat piece of paper right on the area that you want to map .
This type of map is called a gnomonic map projection -LRB- Figure 2.18 -RRB- .
The poles are often mapped this way to avoid distortion .
In 1963 , Arthur Robinson made a map with more accurate sizes and shapes of land areas .
Whatever map projection is used , maps help us find places and to be able to get from one place to another .
The formulas could directly translate coordinates onto the map .
This type of projection is shaped like an oval rather than a rectangle -LRB- Figure 2.19 -RRB- .
In 1988 , the National Geographic Society began to use Robinsons projection for its world maps .
Most maps use a grid of lines to help you to find your location .
This grid system is called a geographic coordinate system .
Lines of longitude are circles that go around Earth from pole to pole , like the sections of an orange .
The Prime Meridian is a circle that runs north to south and passes through Greenwich , England .
When your hands are above your head and your feet are together , say longitude -LRB- your body is long ! -RRB- .
When you put your arms out to the side horizontally , say latitude -LRB- your head and arms make a cross , like the t in latitude -RRB- .
While you are jumping , your arms are going the same way as each of these grid lines : horizontal for latitude and vertical for longitude .
Then move another finger along the longitude line to find your and longitude .
Place your other finger on the longitude along the horizontal axis of the map .
Move your fingers along the latitude and longitude lines until they meet .
Place your left finger along the bottom at 90o W. Move your fingers along the lines until they meet .
Take one finger and move it along the latitude line to find your latitude .
Your location is marked by an angle and distance from some reference point .
Participants find their way along a course across wilderness terrain -LRB- Figure 2.22 -RRB- .
The winner is the person who completes the course in the fastest time .
The angle is usually the angle between your location , the reference point , and a line pointing north .
The distance is given in meters or kilometers .
To find your location or to move from place to place , you need a map , a compass , and some way to measure your distance , such as a range finder .
Use the compass to find which direction is 20o E. Walk 500 meters in that direction to reach your destination .
Polar coordinates are used in a sport called orienteering .
People who do orienteering use a compass and a map with polar coordinates .
A globe is the best way to make a map of the whole Earth .
Because both the planet and a globe have curved surfaces , the sizes and shapes of countries are not distorted .
The shortest distance between two points on a globe is the length of the portion of a circle that connects them .
Globes are difficult to make and carry around .
Globes are best sitting on your desk for reference .
Topographic maps use a line , called a contour line , to show different elevations on a map .
The map does not show the height of the terrain .
Which way do streams flow ?
A topographic map represents the elevations in an area -LRB- Figure 2.27 -RRB- .
Contour lines show the location of hills , mountains and valleys .
A regular road map shows where a road goes .
But a road map doesnt show if the road goes over a mountain pass or through a valley .
Contour lines connect all the points on the map that have the same elevation .
Lets take a closer look at this -LRB- Figure Each contour line represents a specific elevation .
Every fifth contour line is made bold .
Contour lines run next to each other and NEVER cross one another .
If the lines crossed it would mean that one place had two different elevations .
Since each contour line represents a specific elevation , two different contour are separated by the same difference in elevation -LRB- e.g.
This difference between contour lines is called the contour interval .
You can calculate the contour interval by following these steps : a.
The legend on the map also gives the contour interval .
How does a topographic map tell you about the terrain ?
You can tell this because the contour lines there are closely spaced .
The contour lines also show that the hill has a sharp rise of about 200 feet .
Then the slope becomes less steep toward the right .
Concentric circles indicate a hill .
When contour lines form closed loops , there is a hill .
The larger loops encircling the smaller loops are downhill .
The spacing of contour lines shows the slope of the land .
Hatched concentric circles indicate a depression .
The innermost hatched circle represents the deepest part of the depression .
The outer hatched circles represent higher elevations -LRB- Figure 2.30 -RRB- .
V-shaped portions of contour lines indicate stream valleys .
The V shape of the contour lines point uphill .
There is a V shape because the stream channel passes through the point of the V . The open end of the V represents the downstream portion .
A blue line indicates that there is water running through the valley .
Contour lines that are close together indicate a steep slope .
If there is not a blue line the V pattern indicates which way water flows .
You can use the horizontal scale to calculate the slope of the land -LRB- vertical height/horizontal distance -RRB- .
Common scales used in United States Geological Service -LRB- USGS -RRB- maps include the following : 1:24,000 scale - 1 inch = 2000 ft 1:100,000 scale - 1 inch = 1.6 miles 1:250,000 scale - 1 inch = 4 miles Including contour lines , contour intervals , circles , and V-shapes allows a topographic map to show three-dimensional information on a flat piece of paper .
Contour lines that seem to touch indicate a very steep slope , like a cliff .
When contour lines are spaced far apart the slope is gentle .
So contour lines help us see the three-dimensional shape of the land .
There is a steep hill rising just to the right of the city of Stowe .
As we mentioned above , topographic maps show the shape of the land .
Earth scientists use topographic maps for many things : Describing and locating surface features , especially geologic features .
Hikers , campers , and even soldiers use topographic maps to locate their positions in the field .
Civil engineers use topographic maps to determine where roads , tunnels , and bridges should go .
Land use planners and architects use topographic maps when planning development projects , such as housing projects , shopping malls , and roads .
Oceanographers use a type of topographic map that shows water depths -LRB- Figure 2.32 -RRB- .
On this map , the contour lines represent depth below the surface .
These maps are made from depth soundings or sonar data .
They help oceanographers understand the shape of bottoms of lakes , bays , and the ocean .
This information also helps boaters navigate safely .
A geologic map shows the different rocks that are exposed at the surface of a region .
Rock units are shown in a color identified in a key .
On the geologic map of the Grand Canyon , for example , different rock types are shown in different colors .
Rock units show up on both sides of a stream valley .
A geologic map looks very complicated in a region where rock layers have been folded , like the patterns in marble cake .
There are symbols on a geologic map that tell you which direction the rock layers slant , and often there is a cut away diagram , called a cross section , that shows what the rock layers look like below the surface .
A large-scale geologic map will just show geologic provinces .
One of the deadliest hurricanes in United States history hit Galveston , Texas in 1900 .
These advanced warning give people time to prepare for the storm .
The storm was first spotted at sea on Monday , August 27th , 1900 .
It was a tropical storm when it hit Cuba on September 3rd .
Because there was not advanced warning , more than 8000 people lost their lives .
Today , we have satellites with many different types of instruments that orbit the Earth .
With these satellites , satellites can see hurricanes form at sea .
Satellites orbit high above the Earth in several ways .
This means that the satellite stays over the same spot .
Weather satellites use this type of orbit to observe changing weather conditions over a region .
Communications satellites , like satellite TV , use this type of orbit to keep communications going full time .
The satellite orbits at a distance of several hundred kilometers .
In this same amount of time , the Earth rotates only slightly underneath the satellite .
So in less than a day , the satellite can see the entire surface of the Earth .
Some weather satellites use a polar orbit to see how the weather is changing globally .
Also , some satellites that observe the land and oceans use a polar orbit .
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration -LRB- NASA -RRB- has launched a fleet of satellites to study the Earth -LRB- Figure 2.36 -RRB- .
The satellites are operated by several government agencies , including NASA , the National Oceano - graphic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- , and the United States Geological Survey -LRB- USGS -RRB- .
By using different types of scientific instruments , satellites make many kinds of measurements of the Earth .
Some examples of the images from these types of satellites are shown in Figure 2.37 .
Satellites can also help you locate your position on the Earths surface .
By 1993 , the United States military had launched 24 satellites to help soldiers locate their positions on battlefields .
Later , the United States government allowed the public to use this system .
You can buy many types of these in stores .
Prior to the late 20th and early 21st centuries , mapmakers sent people out in the field to determine the boundaries and locations for various features for maps .
State or county borders were used to mark geological features .
This type of mapping is called a Geographic Information System -LRB- GIS -RRB- .
Geologists can use GIS to make maps of natural resources .
City leaders might link these resources to where people live and help plan the growth of cities or communities .
Other types of data can be linked by GIS .
For example , Figure 2.40 shows a map of the counties where farmers made insurance claims for crop damage in 2008 .
Computers have improved how maps are made .
During the 21st century , computers will be used more and more in mapping .
Today , people in the field use GPS receivers to mark the locations of features .
Map-makers also use various satellite images and computers to draw maps .
Computers are able to break apart the fine details of a satellite image , store the pieces of information , and put them back together to make a map .
In some instances , computers can make 3-D images of the map and even animate them .
For example , scientists used computers and satellite images from Mars to create a 3-D image of Mars ice cap -LRB- Figure 2.39 -RRB- .
When you link any type of information to a location , you can put together incredibly useful maps and images .
The information could be numbers of people living in an area , types of plants or soil , locations of groundwater or levels of rainfall .
What would have happened if there had been satellites during the time of the 1900 Galveston earthquake ?
What would have happened if there had been no satellites when hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf of Mexico coast in 2005 ?
Table 20.1 gives examples of how we use natural resources .
Renewable resources can be renewed as they are used .
An example is timber , which comes from trees .
But water pollution and overfishing can cause them to die out if their population becomes too low .
New trees can be planted to replace those that are cut down .
Oil reserves beneath land are running out .
So oil companies have started to drill for oil far out in the ocean .
This costs more money .
Figure 20.2 shows an oil rig that exploded in 2010 .
The explosion killed 11 people .
Millions of barrels of oil spilled into the water .
Elements that are used to produce nuclear power are other examples .
Rich nations use more natural resources than poor nations .
In fact , the richest 20 percent of people use 85 percent of the worlds resources .
In the real world , the difference between rich and poor just keeps growing .
Every 20 minutes , the human population adds 3,500 more people .
More people need more resources .
The human population is expected to increase for at least 40 years .
In a landfill , all those plastic bottles take hundreds of years to break down .
What are the problems caused by producing so much trash ?
Natural resources must be used to produce the materials .
Land must be given over to dump the materials .
If the materials are toxic , they may cause pollution .
This means saving resources .
When we conserve resources , we also cut down on the trash we produce .
Americans throw out 340 million tons of trash each year .
Most of what we throw out ends up in landfills .
There are thousands of places to drop off items such as aluminum cans for recycling .
Many cities allow you to just put your recycling in a special can and put it at the curb .
But it still takes some resources to turn recycled items into new ones .
Reducing resource use means just what it says using fewer resources .
There are lots of ways to reduce our use of resources .
Dont buy a gallon of milk if you can only drink half of it before it spoils .
Instead , buy a half gallon and drink all of it .
For example , buy local produce at a farmers market , like the one in Figure 20.5 .
A lot of resources are saved by not shipping goods long distances .
Products bought at farmers markets use less packaging , too !
About a third of what we throw out is packaging .
Try to buy items with the least amount of packaging .
For example , buy bulk items instead of those that are individually wrapped .
This is called precycling .
Many plastics : The recycling symbol on the bottom of plastic containers shows the type of plastic they contain .
Mixed materials : Packaging that contains more than one material may be hard to recycle .
Choose items that are well made so they will last longer .
This carton is made mostly of cardboard .
Youll buy fewer items in the long run , so youll save money as well as resources .
Sew on a button instead of buying a new shirt .
Youll use fewer resources and save money .
Reusing resources means using items again instead of throwing them away .
A reused item can be used in the same way by someone else .
For example , Shana has a pair of jeans she has outgrown .
Some other ideas for reusing resources are shown in Figure 20.7 .
The materials in them can be reused in new products .
Curbside recycling usually takes these items too .
Old phone books can also be recycled and made into textbooks .
When you shop for new products , look for those that are made of recycled materials -LRB- see Figure 20.8 -RRB- .
What about taking a shower uses energy ?
It takes energy to heat the water and to pump the water to your home .
Energy is used to cook your food .
Motor vehicles need energy from fossil fuels to run .
Figure 20.10 shows the major ways energy is used in the U.S. . A lot of energy is used in homes .
In fact , more energy is used in homes than in stores and businesses .
Even more energy is used for transportation .
Industry uses the most energy .
Industrial uses account for one-third of all the energy used in the U.S.
The resources must be removed from the ground .
Fossil fuels may need to be changed to a different form of energy .
Energy resources must be transported from where they are produced to where they are sold or used .
Consider petroleum as an example .
Oil companies explore for petroleum in areas where they think it might be .
To extract petroleum , companies they must build huge rigs , like the one in Figure 20.12 .
Getting fossil fuels so that they can be used takes many steps .
The oil is then transported to a refinery .
At the refinery , the oil is heated .
Finally , the oil products are transported to gas stations , stores , and industries .
At every step , energy is used .
For every five barrels of oil we use , it takes at least one barrel to get the oil .
Less energy is needed to get renewable energy sources .
Sunlight is everywhere , so no one needs to go out and find it .
All of these steps use energy .
We just need to install solar panels like the ones in Figure 20.13 and let sunlight strike them .
The energy from the sunlight is changed to electricity .
The electricity is used to power lights and appliances in the house .
So solar energy doesnt have to be transported .
Using these energy resources also produces pollution and increases global warming .
Table 20.2 lists some of them .
For example , how might schools use less energy ?
Turn off lights when you leave a room .
Table 20.3 show some ways to use energy more efficiently .
Use of Energy More Efficient Use Another way to use energy more efficiently is with Energy Star appliances .
They carry the Energy Star logo , shown in Figure 20.14 .
To be certified as Energy Star , the appliance must use less energy .
Energy Star appliances save a lot of energy over their lifetime .
What if millions of households used Energy Star appliances ?
Figure 21.1 shows how people use water worldwide .
Municipal use refers to water used by homes and businesses in communities .
Many crops are grown where there isnt enough rainfall for plants to thrive .
For example , crops are grown in deserts of the American southwest .
But much of the water never reaches the crops .
Irrigation water may cause other problems .
The water may dissolve agricultural chemicals such as pesticides .
When the water soaks into the ground , the dissolved chemicals do , too .
Salts in irrigation water can also collect in the soil .
The soil may get too salty for plants to grow .
Irrigation is any way of providing extra water to plants .
Most of the water used in agriculture is used for irrigation .
Livestock also use water , but they use much less .
Irrigation can waste a lot of water .
The type of irrigation shown in Figure 21.2 is the most wasteful .
The water is sprayed into the air and then falls to the ground .
Almost a quarter of the water used worldwide is used in industry .
Industries use water for many purposes .
Water is used to generate electricity .
An important way that industries use water is to cool machines and power plants .
Think about all the ways people use water at home .
The water used inside homes goes down the drain .
At the sewage treatment plant , water can be is treated and prepared for reuse .
Households may also use water outdoors .
Much of the water used outdoors evaporates or runs off into the gutter .
The runoff water may end up in storm sewers that flow into a body of water , such as the ocean .
There are many ways to use water for fun , from white water rafting to snorkeling .
Keeping golf courses green uses an incredible amount of water .
More than 70 percent of Earths surface is covered by water .
One problem is that only a tiny fraction of Earths water is fresh , liquid water that people can use .
Most of the freshwater is frozen in ice sheets , icebergs , and glaciers -LRB- see Figure 21.5 -RRB- .
Rainfall varies around the globe .
About 40 percent of the land gets very little rain .
Drier climates generally have less water for people to use .
In some places , people may have less water available to them for an entire year than many Americans use in a single day !
Richer nations can drill deep wells , build large dams or supply people with water in other ways .
In these countries , just about everyone has access to clean running water in their homes .
Its no surprise that people in these countries also use the most water .
In poorer nations , there is little money to develop water supplies .
Look at the people in Figure 21.6 .
These people must carry water home in a bucket from a distant pump .
People are most likely to run short of water during droughts .
This reduces the jobs people can get and the products they can buy .
People and nations may fight over water resources .
The Figure 21.7 shows the global water situation in the 2030s with water stress and water scarcity on the map .
Human actions have increased how often droughts occur .
One way people can help to bring on drought is by cutting down trees .
Trees add a lot of water vapor to the air .
The water Americans get from their faucets is generally safe .
Their only choice may be to drink water straight from a river -LRB- see Figure 21.8 -RRB- .
If the river is polluted with wastes , it will contain bacteria and other organisms that cause disease .
Almost 9 out of 10 cases of disease worldwide are caused by unsafe drinking water .
Pollution that enters water at just one point is called point source pollution .
For example , chemicals from a factory might empty into a stream through a pipe or set of pipes -LRB- see Figure 21.9 -RRB- .
Pollution that enters in many places is called non-point source pollution .
This means that the pollution is from multiple sources .
With non-point source pollution , runoff may carry the pollution into a body of water .
Huge amounts of chemicals , such as fertilizers and pesticides , are applied to farm fields -LRB- see Figure 21.10 -RRB- .
Some of the chemicals are picked up by rainwater .
In fact , more than 40 human diseases can be caused by water polluted with animal waste .
These farms produce millions of gallons of waste .
The waste is stored in huge lagoons , like the one in Figure 21.11 .
Two examples are described below .
In North Carolina , 25 million gallons of hog manure spilled into a nearby river .
Runoff then carries the chemicals to nearby rivers or lakes .
Dissolved fertilizer causes too much growth of water plants and algae .
This can lead to dead zones where nothing can live in lakes and at the mouths of rivers .
Some of the chemicals can infiltrate into groundwater .
The contaminated water comes up in water wells .
If people drink the polluted water , they may get sick .
Waste from livestock can also pollute water .
The waste contains bacteria and other organisms that cause disease .
Factories and power plants may pollute water with harmful substances .
Many industries produce toxic chemicals .
Nuclear power plants produce radioactive chemicals .
Leaks may not be noticed until a lot of oil has soaked into the ground .
The oil may pollute groundwater so it is no longer fit to drink .
Municipal refers to the community .
Households and businesses in a community are also responsible for polluting the water supply .
For example : People apply chemicals to their lawns .
The chemicals may be picked up by rainwater .
The contaminated runoff enters storm sewers and ends up in nearby rivers or lakes .
Underground septic tanks can develop leaks .
This lets household sewage seep into groundwater .
Municipal sewage treatment plants dump treated wastewater into rivers or lakes .
Sometimes the wastewater is not treated enough and contains bacteria or toxic chemicals .
Ocean water is becoming seriously polluted .
Of course , its because most pollution enters the oceans from the land .
Runoff and rivers carry the majority of pollution into the ocean .
Many cities dump their wastewater directly into coastal waters .
In some parts of the world , raw sewage and trash may be thrown into the water -LRB- see Figure 21.12 -RRB- .
Coastal water may become so polluted that people get sick if they swim in it or eat seafood from it .
The polluted water may also kill fish and other ocean life .
To get at oil buried beneath the seafloor , oil rigs are built in the oceans .
These rigs pump oil from beneath the ocean floor .
Huge ocean tankers carry oil around the world .
If something goes wrong with a rig on a tanker , millions of barrels of oil may end up in the water .
The oil may coat and kill ocean animals .
Some of the oil will wash ashore .
This oil may destroy coastal wetlands and ruin beaches .
Figure 21.13 shows an oil spill on a beach .
The oil washed ashore after a deadly oil rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 .
Thermal pollution is pollution that raises the temperature of water .
This is caused by power plants and factories that use the water to cool their machines .
The plants pump cold water from a lake or coastal area through giant cooling towers , like those in Figure 21.14 .
As it flows through the towers , the cold water absorbs heat .
This warmed water is returned to the lake or sea .
Thermal pollution can kill fish and other water life .
In the mid 1900s , people were startled to see the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland , Ohio , burst into flames !
Nothing could live in it .
Disasters such as rivers burning led to new U.S. laws to protect the water .
Pollution is tracked to its source , and polluters are forced to fix the problem and clean up the pollution .
These consequences have led industries , agriculture , and communities to pollute the water much less than before .
Most water pollution comes from industry , agriculture , and municipal sources .
Homes are part of the municipal source and the individuals and families that live in them can pollute the water supply .
Or grow plants that can thrive on their own without any extra help .
A steady drip of oil from an engine can quickly add up to gallons .
When the oil washes off driveways and streets it can end up in storm drains and pollute the water supply .
Dont let pet litter or pet wastes get into the water supply -LRB- see Figure 21.17 -RRB- .
The nitrogen they contain can cause overgrowth of algae .
The wastes may also contain bacteria and other causes of disease .
Water treatment is a series of processes that remove unwanted substances from water .
The goal of water treatment is to make the water safe to return to the natural environment or to the human water supply .
The water is moved to tanks .
The clumped solids sink to the bottom of the water .
This is called sedimentation .
The water is passed through filters that remove smaller particles from the water .
This is called filtration .
Chlorine is added to the water to kill bacteria and other microbes .
This is called disinfection .
Treating water for other purposes may not include all the same steps .
Thats because water used in agriculture or industry may not have to be as clean as drinking water .
Treating drinking water requires at least four processes : 1 .
Chemicals are added to untreated water .
Conserving water means using less of it .
Figure 21.19 shows a drip irrigation system .
Water pipes run over the surface of the ground .
Tiny holes in the pipes are placed close to each plant .
Water slowly drips out of the holes and soaks into the soil around the plants .
Very little of the water evaporates or runs off the ground .
Some communities save water with rationing .
Much rationing takes place only during times of drought .
During rationing , water may not be used for certain things .
For example , communities may ban lawn watering and car washing .
People may be fined if they use water in these ways .
Follow any bans where you live .
Its easy to save water at home .
And youll save up to 50 gallons of water each time you shower .
At one drip per second , more than 6,000 gallons go down the drain in a year per faucet !
Dont leave the water running while you brush your teeth .
The best place to start saving water is in the bathroom .
That could add up to 10,000 gallons in a year .
Landscape your home with plants that need little water .
Look at the garden in Figure 21.20 .
Follow the tips below to save water at home .
A single household can save up to 20,000 gallons a year with this change alone !
More pollutants mean poorer air quality .
Air quality , in turn , depends on many factors .
Some natural processes add pollutants to the air .
For example , forest fires and volcanoes add carbon dioxide and soot .
In dry areas , the air often contains dust .
However , human actions cause the most air pollution .
Poor air quality started to become a serious problem after the Industrial Revolution .
The machines in factories burned coal .
This released a lot of pollutants into the air .
After 1900 , motor vehicles became common .
Cars and trucks burn gasoline , which adds greatly to air pollution .
The worst incident came in December 1952 .
A temperature inversion over London , England , kept cold air and pollutants near the ground .
The air became so polluted that thousands of people died in just a few days .
This event was called the Big Smoke .
Cars were becoming more popular .
Mountain ranges trapped polluted air over cities .
The California sunshine caused chemical reactions among the pollutants .
These reactions produced many more harmful compounds .
By 1970 , it was clear that something needed to be done to protect air quality .
In the U.S. , the Clean Air Act was passed .
Vehicles , factories , and power plants still release more than 150 million tons of pollutants into the air each year .
Primary pollutants enter the air directly .
Sulfur oxides include sulfur dioxide -LRB- SO2 -RRB- and sulfur trioxide -LRB- SO3 -RRB- .
Sulfur oxides are produced when sulfur and oxygen combine .
This happens when coal burns .
Coal can contain up to 10 percent sulfur .
Toxic heavy metals include mercury and lead .
Lead was once widely used in gasoline , paint , and pipes .
VOCs are released in many human activities , such as raising livestock .
Livestock wastes produce a lot of methane .
Several of these pollutants are described below .
Carbon oxides include carbon monoxide -LRB- CO -RRB- and carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- .
Carbon oxides are released when fossil fuels burn .
Nitrogen oxides include nitric oxide -LRB- NO -RRB- and nitrogen dioxide -LRB- NO2 -RRB- .
Nitrogen oxides form when nitrogen and oxygen combine at high temperatures .
This occurs in hot exhausts from vehicles , factories , and power plants .
Secondary pollutants form when primary pollutants undergo chemical reactions after they are released .
The oxygen atoms combine with molecules of oxygen to form ozone .
This type of smog is seen as a brown haze in the air .
Photochemical smog forms when certain pollutants react together in the presence of sunlight .
Photochemical smog consists mainly of ozone -LRB- O3 -RRB- .
But ozone in smog is found near the ground .
When nitrogen oxides and VOCs are heated by the Sun , they lose oxygen atoms .
Most pollutants enter the air when fossil fuels burn .
Burning fossil fuels releases many pollutants into the air .
Motor vehicles account for almost half of fossil fuel use .
Most vehicles run on gasoline , which comes from petroleum .
Power plants and factories account for more than a quarter of fossil fuel use .
Power plants burn fossil fuels to generate electricity .
The energy they release is used for heating , cooking , and other purposes .
Millions of acres of forest have been cut and burned to make way for farming .
Figure 22.4 shows an example .
Burning trees produces most of the same pollutants as burning fossil fuels .
VOCs enter the air by evaporation .
Thats why theyre called pollutants .
Some air pollutants damage the environment as well as the health of living things .
The type of damage depends on the pollutant .
Particulates cause lung diseases .
Particulates block sunlight from reaching Earths surface .
Less photosynthesis means that plants and phytoplankton produce less food .
The ozone in smog may damage plants .
The effects of ozone add up over time .
Entire forests may die out if ozone levels are very high .
Other plants , including crop plants , may also be damaged by ozone .
Figure 22.6 shows the levels of ozone to watch out for .
They can be harmed by levels of ozone that would not affect most other people .
These compounds can cause lung diseases or make them worse .
Nitrogen and sulfur oxides form acid rain , which is described below .
Carbon monoxide is odorless and colorless , so people cant tell when they are breathing it .
They can enter food chains from the atmosphere .
Thats why people should avoid eating too much of large fish such as tuna .
In people , heavy metals can damage the brain and other organs .
Unborn babies and young children are most affected .
Thats because their organs are still developing .
The metals build up in the tissues of organisms by bioaccumulation .
Bioaccumulation is illustrated in Figure 22.8 .
As heavy metals are passed up a food chain they accumulate .
Imagine a low-level consumer eating a producer .
That consumer takes in all of the heavy metals from all of the producers that it eats .
Then a higher-level consumer eats it and accumulates all the heavy metals from all of the lower-level consumers that it eats .
In this way , heavy metals may accumulate .
At high levels in the food chain , the heavy metals may be quite become quite concentrated .
Its slightly acidic because carbon dioxide in the air dissolves in rain .
This forms carbonic acid , a weak acid .
Acid rain forms when nitrogen and sulfur oxides in air dissolve in rain -LRB- see Figure 22.10 -RRB- .
This forms nitric and sulfuric acids .
Figure 22.11 shows some of the damage done by acid rain .
Acid rain ends up in soil and bodies of water .
These changes can kill trees , fish , and other living things .
Acid rain also dissolves limestone and marble .
This can damage buildings , monuments , and statues .
Ozone near the ground harms human health .
But the ozone layer in the stratosphere protects us from solar rays .
Thats why people were alarmed in the 1980s to learn that there was a hole in the ozone layer .
One CFC molecule can break down as many as 100,000 ozone molecules in this way !
These forms of oxygen do not protect the planet from ultraviolet radiation .
These are human-made chemicals that contain the element chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- .
In the past , CFCs were widely used in spray cans , refrigerators , and many other products .
CFCs are stable compounds that can remain in the atmosphere for hundreds of years .
Once CFCs are in the air , they float up into the stratosphere .
What happens next is shown in Figure 22.12 .
This releases their chlorine atoms -LRB- Cl -RRB- .
The free chlorine atoms may then combine with oxygen atoms in ozone .
With less ozone in the stratosphere , more UV rays reach the ground .
More UV rays increase skin cancer rates .
Just a 1 percent loss of ozone causes a 5 percent increase in skin cancer .
More UV rays also harm plants and phytoplankton .
This may affect entire ecosystems .
When fossil fuels must be used , prevent the pollution from entering the air .
We can reduce our use of fossil fuels in several ways : Conserve fossil fuels .
For example , turning out lights when we arent using them saves electricity .
As a result , they produce just 10 percent of the air pollution produced by cars that run only on gas .
Cars that run on hydrogen and produce no pollution at all have also been developed -LRB- see Figure 22.14 -RRB- .
A lot of the electricity we use comes from coal-burning power plants .
This can add up to a big savings in fossil fuel use .
For example , hybrid cars run on electricity that would be wasted during braking .
These cars use gas only as a backup fuel .
Some of the pollutants from fossil fuels can be filtered out of exhaust before it is released into the air .
Other pollutants can be changed to harmless compounds before they are released .
Scrubbers are used in factories and power plants .
They remove particulates and waste gases from exhaust before it is released to the air .
You can see how a scrubber works in Figure 22.15 .
Catalytic converters are used on motor vehicles .
When they were discovered , worldwide efforts were made to reduce CFCs and carbon dioxide emissions .
It controls almost 100 chemicals that can damage the ozone layer .
Its aim is to return the ozone layer to its normal state .
The Montreal Protocol has been effective in controlling CFCs .
By 1995 , few CFCs were still being used .
But the ozone hole kept growing for several years after that because of the CFCs already in the atmosphere .
The taxes encourage people to use less fossil fuel , which reduces carbon dioxide emissions .
Carbon sequestration is any way of removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and storing it in another form .
Carbon is sequestered naturally by forests .
Trees take in carbon dioxide for photosynthesis .
Artificial methods of sequestering carbon underground are being researched .
One reason is that the worlds biggest producer of greenhouse gases , the U.S. , did not sign the Kyoto Protocol .
The Protocol focuses on controlling greenhouse gas emissions .
Carbon dioxide is the main greenhouse gas causing global warming .
There are several possible ways to reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
They include cap-and-trade systems , carbon taxes , and carbon sequestration In a cap-and-trade system , each nation is given a cap , or upper limit , on carbon dioxide emissions .
If a nation needs to go over its cap , it can trade with another nation that is below its cap .
Carbon taxes are taxes placed on gasoline and other products that produce carbon dioxide .
A beam of light could travel from New York to Los Angeles and back again nearly 40 times in just one second .
Even at that amazing rate , objects in space are so far away that it takes a lot of time for their light to reach us .
Even light from the nearest star , our Sun , takes about 8 minutes to reach Earth .
We need a really big unit to measure distances out in space because distances between stars are so great .
That means the light from Proxima Centauri takes 4.22 years to reach us .
So it takes light 100,000 years to travel from one side of the galaxy to the other !
For example , the Andromeda Galaxy , shown in Figure 23.1 , is about 2.5 million light-years from Earth .
Since scientists can look back in time they can better understand the Universes history .
Humans have been making and using magnifying lenses for thousands of years .
The first telescope was built by Galileo in 1608 .
This type of telescope is called a reflecting telescope , or reflector -LRB- see Figure 23.5 -RRB- .
This is important because a refracting telescope must be much stronger to support the heavy glass .
Its much easier to precisely make mirrors than to precisely make glass lenses .
For that reason , reflectors can be made larger than refractors .
Larger telescopes can collect more light .
This means that they can study dimmer or more distant objects .
Telescopes can also be made to use both lenses and mirrors .
His telescope used two lenses to make distant objects appear both nearer and larger .
Telescopes that use lenses to bend light are called refracting telescopes , or refractors -LRB- Figure 23.4 -RRB- .
Many amateur astronomers still use refractors today .
Refractors are good for viewing details within our solar system .
Around 1670 , Sir Isaac Newton built a different kind of telescope .
Newtons telescope used curved mirrors instead of lenses to focus light .
Radio telescopes collect radio waves .
A group of radio telescopes can be linked together with a computer .
The telescopes observe the same object .
The computer then combines the data from each telescope .
This makes the group function like one single telescope .
An example is shown in Figure 23.7 .
In fact , both are designed to collect and focus radio waves or microwaves from space .
The sinkhole formed when water flowing underground dissolved the limestone .
This telescope would collapse under its own weight if it were not supported by the ground .
Telescopes on Earth all have one big problem : Incoming light must pass through the atmosphere .
This blocks some wavelengths of radiation .
The telescope has helped astronomers answer many of the biggest questions in astronomy .
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration -LRB- NASA -RRB- has placed three other major space telescopes in orbit .
Each uses a different part of the electromagnetic spectrum .
The James Webb Space Telescope will launch in 2014 .
The telescope will replace the aging Hubble .
Also , motion in the atmosphere distorts light .
Many observatories are built on high mountains .
Space telescopes avoid such problems completely since they orbit outside the atmosphere .
Hubble is shown in Figure 23.8 .
Hubble began operations in 1994 .
Humans have been studying the night sky for thousands of years .
Knowing the motions of stars helped people keep track of seasons .
They are objects in the solar system that orbit the Sun .
Ancient astronomers made all of their observations without the aid of a telescope .
Stars were so important that the patterns they made in the sky were named .
These patterns are called constellations .
Even now , constellations help astronomers know where they are looking in the night sky .
The ancient Greeks carefully observed the locations of stars in the sky .
They noticed that some of the stars moved across the background of other stars .
In 1610 , Galileo looked at the night sky through the first telescope .
This tool allowed him to make the following discoveries -LRB- among others -RRB- : There are more stars in the night sky than the unaided eye can see .
One hundred years before Galileo , Copernicus had said that the Earth and the other planets revolved around the Sun .
But Galileos observations through his telescope proved that Copernicus was right .
The band of light called the Milky Way consists of many stars .
The Moon has craters -LRB- see Figure 23.10 -RRB- .
Jupiter has moons orbiting around it .
There are dark spots that move across the surface of the Sun .
Galileos observations made people think differently about the universe .
Until that time , people believed that the Sun and planets revolved around Earth .
Galileos telescope got people to think about the solar system in the right way .
Modern tools have also transformed our way of thinking about the universe .
Today , astronomers attach special instruments to telescopes .
This allows them to collect a wide variety of data .
The data is fed into computers so that it can be studied .
An astronomer may take weeks to analyze all of the data collected from just a single night !
-LRB- Never look directly at the Sun without using the proper filters ! -RRB-
Still , stars seen in a telescope look like single points of light .
Only the red supergiant star Betelgeuse is large enough to appear as a disk .
A spectrometer is a special tool that astronomers commonly use .
Spectrometers allow them to study the light from a star or galaxy .
By carefully studying light from many stars , astronomers know how stars evolve .
They have learned about the distribution and kinds of matter found throughout the universe .
A spectrometer produces a spectrum , like the one shown in Figure 23.11 .
This forms dark lines in the spectrum .
These dark lines reveal what elements the star contains .
Astronomers use the spectrum to learn even more about the star .
Humans did not reach space until the second half of the 20th century .
A rocket moves rapidly in one direction .
The device is propelled by particles flying out of it at high speed in the other direction .
There are records of the Chinese using rockets in war against the Mongols as early as the 13th century .
The Mongols then used rockets to attack Eastern Europe .
Early rockets were also used to launch fireworks .
Rockets were used for centuries before anyone could explain how they worked .
The theory came about in 1687 .
When a rockets propulsion pushes in one direction , the rocket moves in the opposite direction , as seen in the Figure 23.12 .
For a long time , many people believed that a rocket wouldnt work in space .
Fuel is ignited in a chamber .
The gases in the chamber explode .
The explosion creates pressure that forces the gases out of one side of the rocket .
The rocket moves in the opposite direction , as shown in Figure 23.13 .
The force pushing the rocket is called thrust .
Isaac Newton -LRB- 16431727 -RRB- described three basic laws of motion , now referred to as Newtons Laws of Motion : 1 .
Force equals mass multiplied by acceleration .
For centuries , rockets were powered by gunpowder or other solid fuels .
These rockets could travel only short distances .
After the war , von Braun worked for NASA .
These breakthroughs led to rockets that could travel beyond Earth .
Liquid fuel gave rockets enough power to escape Earths gravity -LRB- Figure 23.14 -RRB- .
By using multiple stages , empty fuel containers could drop away .
This reduced the mass of the rocket so that it could fly higher .
Rockets were used during World War II .
The V2 was the first human-made object to travel high enough to be considered in space -LRB- Figure 23.15 -RRB- .
A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object .
Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites .
Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites .
There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time .
Why do satellites stay in orbit ?
If the cannonball is launched at a slow speed , it will fall back to Earth .
This is shown as paths -LRB- A -RRB- and -LRB- B -RRB- .
Something different happens if the cannonball is launched at a fast speed .
The cannonball then goes into a circular orbit , as in path -LRB- C -RRB- .
If the cannonball is launched even faster , it could go into an elliptical orbit -LRB- D -RRB- .
A cannonball launched at a fast speed from Mt.
Everest would not go into orbit .
Newtons law of universal gravitation describes what happens .
The cannonball would burn up in the atmosphere .
However , a rocket can launch straight up , then steer into orbit .
A rocket can carry a satellite above the atmosphere and then release the satellite into orbit .
Every object in the universe is attracted to every other object .
Gravity makes an apple fall to the ground .
Gravity also keeps you from floating away into the sky .
Gravity holds the Moon in orbit around Earth .
It keeps Earth in orbit around the Sun .
Newton used an example to explain how gravity makes orbiting possible .
Imagine a cannonball launched from a high mountain , as shown in Figure 23.17 .
The first artificial satellite was launched just over 50 years ago .
Navigational satellites are used for navigation systems , such as the Global Positioning System -LRB- GPS -RRB- .
The ISS is designed for humans to live in space while conducting scientific research .
Satellites have orbited other objects in the solar system .
These include the Moon , the Sun , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn .
Imaging satellites take pictures Earths surface .
Astronomers use imaging satellites to study and make maps of the Moon and other planets .
These satellites receive and send signals for telephone , television , or other types of communications .
Dozens of satellites collect data about the Earth .
These satellites make detailed images of Earths continents and coastal areas .
Other satellites study the oceans , atmosphere , polar ice sheets , and other Earth systems .
Satellite images help scientists understand how Earths systems affect one another .
Satellites have different views depending on their orbit .
Satellites may be put in a low orbit .
These satellites view a different part of Earth each time they circle .
Imaging and weather satellites need this type of view .
The satellite then remains over the same location on the surface .
Communications satellites are often placed in these orbits .
The war lasted from the end of World War II in 1945 to the breakup of the USSR in 1991 .
The two nations spared no expense to create new and more powerful weapons .
The development of better missiles fostered better rocket technologies .
The USSR launched Sputnik 1 on October 4 , 1957 .
This was the first artificial satellite ever put into orbit .
Sputnik 1 , shown in Figure 23.20 , sent out radio signals , which were detected by scientists and amateur radio operators around the world .
The satellite stayed in orbit for about 3 months , until it burned up as a result of friction with Earths atmosphere .
The launch of Sputnik 1 started the Space Race between the USSR and the USA .
Americans were shocked that the Soviets had the technology to put the satellite into orbit .
They worried that the Soviets might also be winning the arms race .
On November 3 , 1957 , the Soviets launched Sputnik 2 .
This satellite carried the first living creature into orbit , a dog named Laika .
In response to Sputnik program , the U.S. launched two satellites .
Explorer I was launched on January 31 , 1958 and Vanguard 1 on March 17 , 1958 .
National Aeronautics and Space Administration -LRB- NASA -RRB- was established that same year .
On April 12 , 1961 , a Soviet cosmonaut became the first human in space and in orbit .
Less than one month later May 5 , 1961 the U.S. sent its first astronaut into space : Alan Shepherd .
On May 25 , 1961 , President John F. Kennedy challenged the U.S. Congress : I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal , before this decade is out , of landing a man on the Moon and returning him back safely to the Earth .
The Soviets were also trying to reach the Moon .
The answer came eight years after Kennedys challenge , on July 20 , 1969 .
NASAs Apollo 11 mission put astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the Moon , as shown in Figure 23.21 .
A total of five American missions put astronauts on the Moon .
This mission landed on December 11 , 1972 .
No other country has yet put a person on the Moon .
Both the United States and the Soviet Union sent space probes to other planets .
The craft collects data by flying near or landing on an object in space .
The USSR sent several probes to Venus in the Venera missions .
Some landed on the surface and sent back data .
The U.S. sent probes to Mercury , Venus , and Mars in the Mariner missions .
Two probes landed on Mars during the Viking missions .
The U.S. also sent probes to the outer solar system .
These probes conducted fly-bys of Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus , and Neptune .
While the United States continued missions to the Moon in the early 1970s , the Soviets worked to build a space station .
People can live on this craft for a long period of time .
Between 1971 and 1982 , the Soviets put a total of seven Salyut space stations into orbit .
Figure 23.22 shows the last of these , Salyut 7 .
The U.S. only launched one space station during this time .
Skylab was launched in May 1973 .
Three crews visited Skylab , all within its first year in orbit .
Skylab was used to study the effects of staying in space for long period .
Devices on board were and for studying the Sun .
Skylab reentered Earths atmosphere in 1979 , sooner than expected .
Three of the Salyut stations were used for secret military purposes .
The others were used to study the problems of living in space .
Cosmonauts aboard the stations performed a variety of experiments in astronomy , biology , and Earth science .
The first space station designed for long-term use was the Mir space station -LRB- Figure 23.23 -RRB- .
Mir was taken out of orbit in 2001 .
These pieces were put together in space .
Mir holds the current record for the longest continued presence in space .
There were people living on Mir continuously for almost 10 years !
Mir was the first major space project in which the United States and Russia worked together .
American space shuttles transported supplies and people to and from Mir .
American astronauts lived on Mir for many months .
This cooperation allowed the two nations to learn from each other .
The U.S. learned about Russias experiences with long-duration space flights .
The International Space Station , shown in Figure 23.24 is a joint project between the space agencies of many nations These include the United States -LRB- NASA -RRB- , Russia -LRB- RKA -RRB- , Japan -LRB- JAXA -RRB- , Canada -LRB- CSA -RRB- , several European countries -LRB- ESA -RRB- and the Brazilian Space Agency .
American space shuttles deliver most of the supplies and equipment to the station .
Russian Soyuz spacecraft carry people .
NASA wanted a new kind of space vehicle .
Space shuttles usually land at Kennedy Space Center or at Edwards Air Force Base in California .
The orbiter is later hauled back to Florida on the back of a jet airplane .
The new vehicle was called a space shuttle , shown in Figure 23.25 .
This part has wings like At the end of the mission , the orbiter re-enters Earths atmosphere .
The outside heats up as it descends .
Pilots have to steer the shuttle to the runway very precisely .
Space shuttle missions were put on hold while NASA improved the safety of the shuttles .
The second occurred during the takeoff of the Columbia on January 16 , 2003 .
A small piece of insulating foam broke off the fuel tank .
The shield protects the shuttle from extremely high temperatures as it reenters the atmosphere .
When Columbia returned to Earth on February 3 , 2003 , it could not withstand the high temperatures .
The shuttle broke apart .
The space shuttle will be retired in 2011 .
Known as a Crew Exploration Vehicle , Orion is expected to be ready by 2016 .
Crews have launched many satellites .
The first came just 73 seconds after launch , on January 28 , 1986 .
The space shuttle Challenger disintegrated in mid-air , as shown in Figure 23.27 .
The disasters have caused NASA to focus on developing unmanned missions .
These missions still provide a great deal of valuable information .
Incredible images have come from the Hubble Space Telescope -LRB- HST -RRB- .
Even more incredible scientific discoveries have come from HST .
Since then , four shuttle missions have gone to the Hubble to make repairs and upgrades .
The last repair mission to the Hubble happened in 2009 .
Several spacecraft are currently in orbit , studying the Martian surface and thin atmosphere .
Scientists on Earth tell it where to go .
The craft then collects and sends back data from that locations .
The Mars Pathfinder studied the red planet for nearly three months in 1997 .
Two more rovers , Spirit and Opportunity , landed on Mars in 2004 .
Both were only designed to last 90 days , but have lasted many times longer .
Spirit sent back data until it became stuck in January 2010 .
Opportunity continues to explore Mars .
Budget concerns have impacted NASA in recent years .
Many scientists have come together to discuss the goals of the U.S. space program .
Some would like to further explore the Moon .
Private aerospace companies will play more of a role in the coming years .
How to Discover a New Planet Thousands of planets - ones that look totally different than what were used to , and possibly could support life , exist outside of our solar system .
But were only just now starting to find them .
In the video below , Ashley takes you behind the simple technique that astronomers have been using to discover these curious new planets .
As you walk , the ground usually looks pretty flat , even though the Earth is round .
No part of it would disappear before the other .
In the solar system , the planets orbit around the Sun .
We have pictures of Earth taken from space that show that Earth is round .
Most of Earths surface is covered with water .
Earth appears to be the only planet in the solar system with living creatures .
Astronauts aboard the Apollo 17 shuttle took this one , called The Blue Marble -LRB- Figure 24.1 -RRB- .
Therefore , Earths surface is constantly undergoing change .
Earth looks like a giant blue and white ball .
Long before spacecraft took photos of Earth from space , people knew that Earth was round .
One way was to look at ships sailing off into the distance .
This Earth-Moon system orbits the Sun in a regular path -LRB- Figure 24.4 -RRB- .
Gravity keeps the Earth and Moon in their orbits .
Earths gravity pulls the Moon toward Earths center .
Without gravity , the Moon would continue moving in a straight line off into space .
The strength of the force of gravity depends on two things .
The field extends several thousand kilometers into space .
Earths magnetic field is created by the movements of molten metal in the outer core .
If you have a large bar magnet , you can hang it from a string .
People can navigate by finding magnetic north -LRB- Figure 24.8 -RRB- .
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the North and South Poles .
As Earth spins on its axis , it also orbits around the Sun .
These motions lead to the cycles we see .
Day and night , seasons , and the tides are caused by Earths motions .
In 1851 , Lon Foucault , a French scientist , hung a heavy iron weight from a long wire .
The weight swung back and forth in a straight line .
If Earth did not rotate , the pendulum would not change direction as it was swinging .
The direction of the pendulum appeared to change because Earth rotated beneath it .
A Turn of the Earth In this video , MIT students demonstrate how a Foucault Pendulum is used to prove that the Earth is rotating .
How long does it take Earth to spin once on its axis ?
The Moon and the stars at night also seem to rise in the east and set in the west .
As Earth turns , the Moon and stars change position in the sky .
Whatever time it is , the side of Earth facing the Sun has daylight .
The side facing away from the Sun is dark .
If you look at Earth from the North Pole , the planet spins counterclockwise .
As the Earth rotates , you see the Sun moving across the sky from east to west .
The Sun rises in the east and sets in the west .
Actually , it is the Earths rotation that makes it appear that way .
This means that as the Earth rotates , one hemisphere has longer days with shorter nights .
The Southern Hemisphere does the opposite from summer to fall to winter to spring .
For example , in the Northern hemisphere summer begins on June 21 .
This means that the Southern Hemisphere experiences its longest night and shortest day -LRB- Figure 24.11 -RRB- .
As Earth orbits the Sun , the Northern Hemisphere goes from winter to spring , then summer and fall .
Earths revolution around the Sun takes 365.24 days .
The Earth stays in orbit around the Sun because of the Suns gravity -LRB- Figure 24.12 -RRB- .
Students sometimes think the slightly oval shape of our orbit causes Earths seasons .
The side of the Moon that always faces Earth is called the near side .
The side of the Moon that always faces away from Earth is called the far side -LRB- Figure 24.13 -RRB- .
All people for all time have only seen the Moons near side .
With no atmosphere , the Moon is not protected from extreme temperatures .
Daytime temperatures can reach as high as 123C -LRB- 253F -RRB- .
At night , the average temperature drops to -153 C -LRB- -243 F -RRB- .
The lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233 C -LRB- -397 F -RRB- .
The Moon makes no light of its own .
The Moon rotates on its axis once for every orbit it makes around the Earth .
This means that the same side of the Moon always faces Earth .
We all know what the Moon looks like .
In fact , the Moon has looked the same to every person who has looked up at it for all time .
Even the dinosaurs and trilobites , should they have looked up at it , would have seen the same thing .
Natural processes continually alter the Earths surface .
Without these processes , would Earths surface resemble the Moons ?
Even though we cant see it from Earth , the Moon has changed recently too .
The lunar landscape is covered by craters caused by asteroid impacts -LRB- Figure 24.14 -RRB- .
Because the Moon has no water , wind , or weather , the craters remain unchanged .
The Moons coldest temperatures are found deep in the craters .
The coldest craters are at the south pole on the Moons far side , where the Sun never shines .
The rock looks light because it reflects more of the Suns light .
The maria formed about 3.0 to 3.5 billion years ago , when the Moon was continually bombarded by meteorites -LRB- Figure 24.15 -RRB- .
Large meteorites broke through the Moons newly formed surface .
Scientists estimate volcanic activity on the Moon ended about 1.2 billion years ago .
The rock that makes up the highlands is lighter in color and crystallized more slowly than the maria .
There are no lakes , rivers , or even small puddles anywhere to be found on the Moons surface .
This means that there is no erosion .
Many moons in our solar system have cratered surfaces .
NASA scientists have discovered a large number of water molecules mixed in with lunar dirt .
The crust is composed of igneous rock .
The mantle is made of rock like Earths mantle .
We learned this both from the rock samples gathered by astronauts and from spacecraft sent to the Moon .
The Sun is made almost entirely of the elements hydrogen and helium .
Most atoms in the Sun exist as plasma .
Because the Sun is made of gases , it does not have a defined outer boundary .
The inner three layers make up what we would actually call the Sun .
Nuclear fusion reactions create the immense temperature .
In these reactions , hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium .
This releases vast amounts of energy .
The energy moves towards the outer layers of the Sun .
It has a temperature of about 4 million degrees C. Energy from the core travels through the radiative zone .
The rate the energy travels is extremely slow .
Light particles , called photons , can only travel a few millimeters before they hit another particle .
It may take 50 million years for a photon to travel all the way through the radiative zone .
The convection zone surrounds the radiative zone .
The material then receives more heat from the radiative zone .
The chromosphere lies above the photosphere .
The thin chromosphere is heated by energy from the photosphere .
Temperatures range from about 4000 degrees C to about 10,000 degrees C . The chromosphere is not as hot as other parts of the Sun , and it glows red .
Jets of gas sometimes fly up through the chromosphere .
With speeds up to 72,000 km per hour , the jets can fly as high as 10,000 kilometers .
The corona extends millions of kilometers into space .
Sometime you should try to see a total solar eclipse .
If you do you will see the Suns corona shining out into space .
Looking directly at the Sun can cause blindness .
Sunspots disrupt the transfer of heat from the Suns lower layers .
The number of sunspots begins at a minimum .
The number gradually increases to the maximum .
Sunspots form because loops of the Suns magnetic field break through the surface .
Sunspots usually occur in pairs .
The loop breaks through the surface where it comes out of the Sun .
Solar flares are violent explosions that release huge amounts of energy -LRB- Figure 24.19 -RRB- .
The streams of high energy particles they emit make up the solar wind .
Solar flares can even cause damage on Earth .
They have knocked out entire power grids and can disturb radio , satellite , and cell phone communications .
Plasma flows along the loop that connects sunspots .
SDO provides extremely high resolution images .
The craft gathers data faster than anything that ever studied the Sun .
To learn more about the SDO mission , visit : http://sdo.gsfc.nasa.gov To find these videos for download , check out : There are other ways to connect with NASA .
This plasma forms a glowing arch .
Solar prominences can reach thousands of kilometers into the Suns atmosphere .
Prominences can last for a day to several months .
Prominences can be seen during a total solar eclipse .
NASAs Solar Dynamics Observatory -LRB- SDO -RRB- was launched on February 11 , 2010 .
SDO is studying the Suns magnetic field .
This includes how the Sun affects Earths atmosphere and climate .
When a new moon passes directly between the Earth and the Sun , it causes a solar eclipse -LRB- Figure 24.20 -RRB- .
The Moon casts a shadow on the Earth and blocks our view of the Sun .
When the Moons shadow completely blocks the Sun , it is a total solar eclipse -LRB- Figure 24.21 -RRB- .
That is because the Moons shadow only covers a very small area on Earth and Earth is turning very rapidly .
Stars become visible in the sky and it gets colder outside .
So during a solar eclipse , its easy to see the Suns corona and solar prominences .
This plane is called the ecliptic .
It is the part in which all of the light has been blocked .
It is where the light is only partially blocked .
During a total lunar eclipse , the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra .
During a partial lunar eclipse , only a portion of the Moon enters Earths umbra .
When the Moon passes through Earths penumbra , it is a penumbral eclipse .
Since Earths shadow is large , a lunar eclipse lasts for hours .
Anyone with a view of the Moon can see a lunar eclipse .
Partial lunar eclipses occur at least twice a year , but total lunar eclipses are less common .
The Moon glows with a dull red coloring during a total lunar eclipse .
The Moon does not produce any light of its own .
This is because some sunlight reflects off the Earth and hits the Moon .
During the crescent moon phase , the Moon is less than half lit .
During the gibbous moon phase , the Moon is more than half lit .
As the Moon moves around the Earth , we see different parts of the Moon lit up by the Sun .
This causes the phases of the Moon .
As the Moon revolves around Earth , it changes from fully lit to completely dark and back again .
A full moon occurs when the whole side facing Earth is lit .
This happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun .
About one week later , the Moon enters the quarter-moon phase .
Only half of the Moons lit surface is visible from Earth , so it appears as a half circle .
The Sun and all the objects that are held by the Suns gravity are known as the solar system .
These objects all revolve around the Sun .
The ancient Greeks recognized five planets .
In fact , the word planet comes from a Greek word meaning wanderer .
These objects were thought to be important , so they named them after gods from their mythology .
The names for the planets Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn came from the names of gods and a goddess .
The ancient Greeks thought that Earth was at the center of the universe , as shown in Figure 25.1 .
The sky had a set of spheres layered on top of one another .
Each object in the sky was attached to one of these spheres .
The object moved around Earth as that sphere rotated .
These spheres contained the Moon , the Sun , and the five planets they recognized : Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn .
An outer sphere contained all the stars .
The planets appear to move much faster than the stars , so the Greeks placed them closer to Earth .
Ptolemy published this model of the solar system around 150 AD .
About 1,500 years after Ptolemy , Copernicus proposed a startling idea .
Copernicus developed his model because it better explained the motions of the planets .
Copernicus did not publish his new model until his death .
It wasnt until Galileo developed his telescope that people would take the Copernican
Today we know that we have eight planets , five dwarf planets , over 165 moons , and many , many asteroids and other small objects in our solar system .
Figure 25.3 shows our solar system .
Table 25.1 gives some data on the mass and diameter of the Sun and planets relative to Earth .
Youve probably heard about Pluto .
When it was discovered in 1930 , Pluto was called the ninth planet .
Astronomers were faced with a problem .
In 2006 , these scientists decided what a planet is .
According to the new definition , a planet must : Orbit a star .
Be big enough that its own gravity causes it to be round .
Have cleared the area of its orbit of smaller objects .
Astronomers later found out that Pluto was not like other planets .
There are many other reasons why Pluto does not fit with the other planets in our solar system .
They were actually seeing Pluto and its moon , Charon .
This one object looked big enough to be a planet .
Astronomers also discovered many objects like Pluto .
Figure 25.4 shows the Sun and planets with the correct sizes .
The table shows how long it takes each planet to spin on its axis .
It also shows how long it takes each planet to complete an orbit .
Notice how slowly Venus rotates !
Some astronomers think Pluto was dragged into its orbit by Neptune .
Distances in the solar system are often measured in astronomical units -LRB- AU -RRB- .
1 AU equals about 150 million km -LRB- 93 million miles -RRB- .
Table 25.2 shows the distance from the Sun to each planet in AU .
Planets are held in their orbits by the force of gravity .
Gravity is great enough to hold the planets to the Sun even though the distances between them are enormous .
Gravity also holds moons in orbit around planets .
Now let go of the string .
The ball will fly away from you in a straight line .
It was the string pulling on the ball that kept the ball moving in a circle .
The force pulling the planet is the pull of gravity between the planet and the Sun .
Every object is attracted to every other object by gravity .
The force of gravity between two objects depends on the mass of the objects .
Since the early 1990s , astronomers have discovered other solar systems .
A solar system has one or more planets orbiting one or more stars .
Another sign is the partial dimming of a stars light as the planet passes in front of it .
They are called exoplanets because they orbit a star other than the Sun .
As of June 2013 , 891 exoplanets have been found .
More exoplanets are found all the time .
Most are discovered because of some tell-tale signs .
To figure out how the solar system formed , we need to put together what we have learned .
Scientists think the solar system formed from a big cloud of gas and dust , called a nebula .
This model explains why all the planets are found in the flat , disk-shaped region .
It also explains why all the planets revolve in the same direction .
The solar system formed from the nebula about 4.6 billion years ago
The nebula was made mostly of hydrogen and helium .
Gravity caused the nebula to contract -LRB- Figure 25.6 -RRB- .
As the nebula contracted , it started to spin .
This is what happens when an ice skater pulls her arms to her sides during a spin move .
The spinning caused the nebula to form into a disk shape .
The Sun was the first object to form in the solar system .
Gravity pulled matter together to the center of the disk .
Larger clumps attracted smaller clumps with their gravity .
Eventually , all these pieces grew into the planets and moons that we find in our solar system today .
Its so cold by Jupiter and beyond that these materials can form solid particles .
Since the gases can escape , the inner planets Mercury , Venus , Earth , and Mars formed from denser elements .
Density and pressure increased tremendously .
Fusion reactions release huge amounts of nuclear energy .
Small pieces of dust started clumping together .
These clumps collided and combined with other clumps .
In March 2011 , MESSENGER became the first spacecraft to enter an orbit around Mercury .
During its year-long mission , the craft will map the planets surface and conduct other studies .
One of these images can be seen in Figure 25.9 .
The planet is also closest to the Sun and appears in Figure 25.7 .
As Figure 25.8 shows , the surface of Mercury is covered with craters , like Earths Moon .
The presence of impact craters that are so old means that Mercury hasnt changed much geologically for billions of years .
With only a trace of an atmosphere , it has no weather to wear down the ancient craters .
Because Mercury is so close to the Sun , it is difficult to observe from Earth , even with a telescope .
In 2004 , the MESSENGER mission left Earth .
Mercury is named for the Roman messenger god .
Mercury was a messenger because he could run extremely fast .
The Greeks gave the planet this name because Mercury moves very quickly in its orbit around the Sun .
Mercury orbits the Sun in just 88 Earth days .
Mercury rotates slowly on its axis , turning exactly three times for every two times it orbits the Sun .
Mercury is very close to the Sun , so it can get very hot .
As the planet rotates very slowly , the temperature varies tremendously .
The poles never receive direct sunlight .
Figure 25.10 shows a diagram of Mercurys interior .
Scientists think that the interior contains a large core made mostly of melted iron .
Mercurys core takes up about 42 % of the planets volume .
Mercurys highly cratered surface is evidence that Mercury is not geologically active .
Named after the Roman goddess of love , Venus is the only planet named after a female .
Venus is sometimes called Earths sister planet .
Viewed through a telescope , Venus looks smooth and featureless .
The planet is covered by a thick layer of clouds .
The thick atmosphere causes a strong greenhouse effect .
We make maps of the surface using radar , because the thick clouds wont allow us to take photographs of the surface of Venus .
Figure 25.12 shows the topographical features of Venus .
The image was produced by the Magellan probe on a flyby .
Radar waves sent by the spacecraft reveal mountains , valleys , vast lava plains , and canyons .
Clouds on Earth are made of water vapor .
This means that Venus doesnt have tectonic plates .
Plate tectonics on Earth erases features over time .
Figure 25.13 is an image made using radar data .
Scientists think the color of sunlight on Venus is
Venus is the only planet that rotates clockwise as viewed from its North Pole .
All of the other planets rotate counterclockwise .
Venus turns slowly , making only one turn every 243 days .
It takes Venus only 225 days to orbit the Sun .
Because the orbit of Venus is inside Earths orbit , Venus always appears close to the Sun .
You can see Venus rising early in the morning , just before the Sun rises .
For this reason , Venus is sometimes called the morning star .
When it sets in the evening , just after the Sun sets , it may be called the evening star .
Since planets only reflect the Suns light , Venus should not be called a star at all !
Earth is the third planet out from the Sun , shown in Figure 25.14 .
Earth is a very diverse planet , seen in Figure 25.14 .
Water appears as vast oceans of liquid .
The evolution of plants introduced more oxygen for animals .
Water is also seen as ice at the poles or as clouds of vapor .
The Earth is divided into many plates .
The plates collide or slide past each other .
Plate motions cause most geological activity .
This activity includes earthquakes , volcanoes , and the buildup of mountains .
Earth rotates on its axis once every 24 hours .
Earth orbits the Sun once every 365.24 days .
This satellite orbits Earth once every 29.5 days .
This moon is covered with craters , and also has large plains of lava .
The Moon came into being from material that flew into space after Earth and a giant asteroid collided .
Mars , shown in Figure 25.15 , is the fourth planet from the Sun .
The rover , Opportunity , was still moving around on the surface .
No humans have ever set foot on Mars .
NASA and the European Space Agency have plans to send people to Mars .
Mars atmosphere is thin compared to Earths .
This means that there is much lower pressure at the surface .
People can stand on Earth and observe the planet through a telescope .
Viewed from Earth , Mars is red .
The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet Mars after the god of war .
The planets red color reminded them of blood .
Mars has only a very thin atmosphere , made up mostly of carbon dioxide .
Olympus Mons is shown in Figure 25.16 .
One-fifth of the circumference of Mars is covered by the canyon .
If there was liquid water on Mars , life might have existed there in the past .
The ice melts when volcanoes erupt .
At this times liquid water flows across the surface .
There are many surface features that look like water - eroded canyons .
The Mars rover collected round clumps of crystals that , on Earth , usually form in water .
Mars has two very small , irregular moons , Phobos -LRB- seen in Figure 25.18 -RRB- and Deimos .
These moons were discovered in 1877 .
They are named after the two sons of Ares , who followed their father into war .
The moons were probably asteroids that were captured by Martian gravity .
Jupiter , shown in Figure 25.19 , is the largest planet in our solar system .
Jupiter is named for the king of the gods in Roman mythology .
Because Jupiter is so large , it reflects a lot of sunlight .
Jupiter is made mostly of hydrogen , with some helium , and small amounts of other elements .
The upper layer contains clouds of ammonia .
These bands rotate around the planet .
The ammonia also swirls around in tremendous storms .
The Great Red Spot , shown in Figure 25.20 , is Jupiters most noticeable feature .
Clouds in the storm rotate counterclockwise .
Scientists think that Europa is a good place to look for extraterrestrial life .
Scientists think that the ice may sit on top of an ocean of liquid water .
Europa is heated by Jupiter .
Jupiters tidal forces are so great that they stretch and squash its moon .
This could produce enough heat for there to be liquid water .
Numerous missions have been planned to explore Europa , including plans to drill through the ice and send a probe into the ocean .
However , no such mission has yet been attempted .
In 1979 , two spacecrafts , Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 , visited Jupiter and its moons .
These four moons were first discovered by Galileo in 1610 .
Figure 25.21 shows the four Galilean moons and their sizes relative to Jupiters Great Red Spot .
These moons are named Io , Europa , Ganymede , and Callisto .
Saturn , shown in Figure 25.22 , is famous for its beautiful rings .
The planet is made mostly of hydrogen and helium .
These clouds rotate rapidly around the planet .
Thunder and lightning have been seen in the storms on Saturn -LRB- Figure 25.23 -RRB- .
This means that if there were a bathtub big enough , Saturn would float !
Saturn orbits the Sun once about every 30 Earth years .
The clouds form a hexagonal pattern , as shown in the infrared image in Figure 25.24 .
This hexagon was viewed by Voyager 1 in the 1980s .
It was still there when the Cassini Orbiter visited in 2006 .
No one is sure why the clouds form this pattern .
Saturns rings were first observed by Galileo in 1610 .
Ring dust and gas are attracted to the moon by its gravity .
Other gaps in the rings are caused by the competing forces of Saturn and its moons outside the rings .
In 1659 , the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens realized that they were rings circling Saturns equator .
The rings appear tilted .
The Voyager 1 spacecraft visited Saturn in 1980 .
Voyager 2 followed in 1981 .
These probes sent back detailed pictures of Saturn , its rings , and some of its moons .
From the Voyager data , we learned that Saturns rings are made of particles of water and ice with a little bit of dust .
As of 2011 , over 60 moons have been identified around Saturn .
This atmosphere was around before life developed on Earth .
Scientists now think that there are lakes on Titans surface .
These lakes contain liquid methane and ethane instead of water !
Methane and ethane are compounds found in natural gas .
Some of the very small moons are found within the rings .
Someone must decide which ones are large enough to call moons .
Figure 25.25 compares the size of Titan to Earth .
Uranus , shown in Figure 25.26 , is named for the Greek god of the sky , the father of Saturn .
Astronomers pronounce the name YOOR-uh-nuhs .
The planet was first discovered with a telescope by the astronomer William Herschel in 1781 .
A photon from the Sun takes about 2 hours and 40 minutes to reach Uranus .
Uranus orbits the Sun once about every 84 Earth years .
The planet is composed mainly of hydrogen and helium .
These materials include water , ammonia , and methane .
This leaves a blue-green color .
All of the planets rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the Sun .
So Uranus rolls along like a bowling ball as it revolves around the Sun .
How did Uranus get this way ?
Scientists think that the planet was struck and knocked over by another planet-sized object .
This collision probably took place billions of years ago .
Uranus has a faint system of rings , as shown in Figure 25.27 .
All but a few are named for characters from the plays of William Shakespeare .
The five biggest moons of Uranus , Miranda , Ariel , Umbriel , Titania , and Oberon , are shown in Figure
Neptune is shown in Figure 25.29 .
Neptune was discovered in 1846 .
It was just where scientists predicted it would be !
Due to its blue color , the planet was named Neptune for the Roman god of the sea .
Uranus and Neptune are often considered sister planets .
One orbit around the Sun takes Neptune 165 Earth years .
Scientists guessed Neptunes existence before it was discovered .
Uranus did not always appear exactly where it should .
This gravitational pull was affecting its orbit .
The blue color is caused by gases in its atmosphere , including methane .
Wind speeds can reach 1,100 km/h -LRB- 700 mph -RRB- .
The rapid winds surprised astronomers .
When Voyager 2 visited Neptune in 1986 , there was a large dark-blue spot south of the equator .
This spot was called the Great Dark Spot .
When the Hubble Space Telescope photographed Neptune in 1994 , the Great Dark Spot had disappeared .
Another dark spot had appeared north of the equator .
Astronomers believe that both of these spots represent gaps in the methane clouds on Neptune .
Only Triton , shown in Figure 25.30 , has enough mass to be round .
Triton orbits in the direction opposite to Neptunes orbit .
Scientists think Triton did not form around Neptune .
The satellite was captured by Neptunes gravity as it passed by .
Pluto was once considered one of the outer planets , but when the definition of a planet was changed in 2006 , Pluto became one of the dwarf planets .
It is one of the largest and brightest objects that make up this group .
Look for Pluto in the next lesson , in the discussion of dwarf planets .
Asteroids orbit the Sun , but they are more like giant rocks than planets .
An asteroid can only change due to a collision .
A collision may cause the asteroid to break up .
It may create craters on the asteroids surface .
An asteroid may strike a planet if it comes near enough to be pulled in by its gravity .
Figure 25.31 shows a typical asteroid .
Hundreds of thousands of asteroids have been found in our solar system .
This region is called the asteroid belt , as shown in Figure 25.32 .
Still , their total mass adds up to only about 4 percent of Earths Moon .
Asteroids formed at the same time as the rest of the solar system .
Jupiters gravity kept them apart .
Near-Earth asteroids have orbits that cross Earths orbit .
This means that they can collide with Earth .
Small asteroids do sometimes collide with Earth .
An asteroid about 510 m in diameter hits about once per year .
When large asteroids hit Earth in the past , many organisms died .
Astronomers keep looking for near-Earth asteroids .
Most are composed of material that has not changed since early in the solar system .
Dawn mission will visit Vesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015 .
Scientists can learn a lot from them about how the solar system formed .
Scientists have sent spacecraft to study asteroids .
In 1997 , the NEAR Shoemaker probe orbited the asteroid 433 Eros .
The craft finally landed on its surface in 2001 .
The Japanese Hayabusa probe returned to Earth with samples of a small near-earth asteroid in 2010 .
People call them shooting stars because thats what they look like .
The light you see comes from a small piece of matter burning up as it flies through Earths atmosphere .
Before these small pieces of matter enter Earths atmosphere , they are called meteoroids .
Larger objects are called asteroids ; smaller objects are interplanetary dust .
Meteoroids sometimes cluster together in long trails .
When Earth passes through a comet trail , there is a meteor shower .
A meteoroid is dragged towards Earth by gravity and enters the atmosphere .
Friction with the atmosphere heats the object quickly , so it starts to vaporize .
Some are from asteroids that have split apart .
For this to happen , an asteroid smashed into Mars and sent up debris .
A bit of the debris entered Earths atmosphere as a meteor .
Most meteors vaporize in the atmosphere .
Large meteoroids may not burn up entirely in the atmosphere .
A small core may remain and hit the Earths surface .
This is called a meteorite .
Meteorites provide clues about our solar system .
Comets are small , icy objects that orbit the Sun .
The time between one visit from a comet and the next is called the comets period .
The first comet whose period was known was Halleys Comet .
Halleys Comet last traveled through the inner solar system in 1986 .
The comet will appear again in 2061 . Who will look up at it ?
When a comet gets close to the Sun , its outer layers of ice melt and evaporate .
The vaporized gas and dust forms an atmosphere around the comet .
This atmosphere is called a coma .
Radiation and particles streaming from the Sun push some of this gas and dust into a long tail .
A comets tail always points away from the Sun , no matter which way the comet is moving .
Figure Gases in the coma and tail of a comet reflect light from the Sun .
Comets may have brought water into the early Earth .
Other substances could also have come from comets .
Short-period comets are from a region beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper Belt .
Kuiper is pronounced KI-per , rhyming with viper .
Most long-period comets come from a very distant region of the solar system .
This region is called the Oort cloud .
Comets carry materials in from the outer solar system .
Before 2006 , Ceres was thought to be the largest asteroid .
Its gravity was not high enough to clear its orbit .
Astronomers figured out that they were like planets except for one thing .
Ceres is now considered a dwarf planet along with Pluto .
These objects had not cleared their orbits of smaller objects .
Astronomers made a category called dwarf planets .
Ceres is a rocky body that orbits the Sun and is not a star .
But even then , scientists knew it was an unusual planet .
We have discovered more than 200 million Kuiper belt objects .
Some scientists think that Pluto-Charon system is a double dwarf planet -LRB- Figure 25.37 -RRB- .
Two smaller moons , Nix and Hydra , were discovered in 2005 .
Haumea was named a dwarf planet in 2008 .
Like other Kuiper belt objects , Haumea is covered by ice .
This means that most of Haumea is rocky .
This is a group of astronomical objects that formed from an impact .
All of these objects are thought to have formed from a collision very early in the formation of the solar system .
Haumeas odd oval shape is probably caused by its extremely rapid rotation .
The name comes from the mythology of the Eastern Islanders .
Makemake was the god that created humanity .
At a distance between 38.5 to 53 AU , this dwarf planet orbits the Sun in 310 years .
Makemake is made of methane , ethane , and nitrogen ices .
Look for Quaoar , Varuna and Orcus to be possibly added to the list of dwarf planets in the future .
Because of its distance , Eris was not discovered until 2005 .
Its discovery helped astronomers realize that they needed a new definition of planet .
Its moon orbits Eris once about every 16 days .
Astronomers know there may be other dwarf planets far out in the solar system .
The stars that make up a constellation appear close to each other from Earth .
They move because Earth is spinning on its axis .
The constellations also move with the seasons .
This is because Earth revolves around the Sun .
People who spent a lot of time outdoors at night , like shepherds , named them and told stories about them .
Figure 26.1 shows one of the most easily recognized constellations .
The ancient Greeks thought this group of stars looked like a hunter .
The constellations stay the same night after night .
However , each night the constellations move across the sky .
The Sun is just an ordinary star , but it appears much bigger and brighter than any of the other stars .
How do stars generate so much energy ?
Scientists have built machines called particle accelerators .
These amazing tools smash particles that are smaller than atoms into each other head-on .
This creates new particles .
Scientists use particle accelerators to learn about nuclear fusion in stars .
They can also learn about how atoms came together in the early universe .
Stars shine in many different colors .
The color relates to a stars temperature and often its size .
The air a few inches above the coil begins to feel warm .
As the coil gets hotter , it starts to glow a dull red .
Like a coil on a stove , a stars color is determined by the temperature of the stars surface .
The most common way of classifying stars is by color as shown , in Table 26.1 .
Each class of star is given a letter , a color , and a range of temperatures .
Class K M Color Orange Red Temperature range 3,5005,000 K 2,0003,500 K Sample Star Arcturus is a Class K star that looks like the Sun but is much larger .
The red supergiant Betel - geuse is seen near Orions belt .
Bigger stars produce more energy , so their surfaces are hotter .
The letters dont match the color names because stars were first grouped as A through O.
It wasnt until later that their order was corrected to go by increasing temperature .
Class A Color White Temperature range 7,50010,000 K Sample Star Sirius A is the brightest star that we see in the night sky .
We could say that stars are born , change over time , and eventually die .
Most stars change in size , color , and class at least once during their lifetime .
Our Sun and solar system formed out of a nebula .
A nebula is shown in Figure 26.2 .
In Figure 26.1 , the fuzzy area beneath the central three stars contains the Orion nebula .
For a star to form , gravity pulls gas and dust into the center of the nebula .
As the material becomes denser , the pressure and the temperature increase .
When the temperature of the center becomes hot enough , nuclear fusion begins .
The ball of gas has become a star !
For most of a stars life , hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium atoms .
A star remains on the main sequence as long as it is fusing hydrogen to form helium .
As a medium-sized star , it will continue to shine for about 5 billion more years .
Large stars burn through their supply of hydrogen very quickly .
These stars live fast and die young !
A star like our Sun will become a red giant in its next stage .
When a star uses up its hydrogen , it begins to fuse helium atoms .
At this time the stars core starts to collapse inward .
The stars outer layers spread out and cool .
What happens next depends on the stars mass .
A star like the Sun stops fusion and shrinks into a white dwarf star .
A more massive star ends its life in a more dramatic way .
Very massive stars become red supergiants , like Betelgeuse .
When there is nothing left to fuse , the stars iron core explodes violently .
Gold , silver , uranium and the other heavy elements can only form in a supernova explosion .
A supernova can shine as brightly as an entire galaxy , but only for a short time , as shown in Figure 26.3 .
After a supernova explosion , the stars core is left over .
If the core is less than about four times the mass of the Sun , the star will become a neutron star .
A neutron star is shown in Figure 26.4 .
This type of star is made almost entirely of neutrons .
If the core remaining after a supernova is more than about 5 times the mass of the Sun , the core collapses to become a black hole .
Black holes are so dense that not even light can escape their gravity .
Astronomers use light years as the unit to describe distances in space .
How do astronomers measure the distance to stars ?
Two stars that orbit each other are called a binary star system .
Figure 26.5 shows two binary star systems orbiting each other .
This creates an unusual quadruple star system .
The cluster contains red and blue giant stars .
Open clusters are groups of up to a few thousand stars held together by gravity .
The Jewel Box , shown in Figure an open cluster are young stars that all formed from the same nebula .
Globular clusters are groups of tens to hundreds of thousands of stars held tightly together by gravity .
Figure 26.7 shows a globular cluster .
The biggest groups of stars are called galaxies .
The closest spiral galaxy , the Andromeda Galaxy , shown in Figure 26.8 , is 2,500,000 light years away and contains one trillion stars !
Galaxies are divided into three types , according to shape .
Spiral galaxies are a rotating disk of stars and dust .
Figure 26.9 shows a spiral galaxy from the side .
Figure 26.10 shows a typical elliptical galaxy .
The smallest are called dwarf elliptical galaxies .
Dwarf galaxies are often found near larger galaxies .
Giant elliptical galaxies contain over a trillion stars .
Elliptical galaxies are red to yellow in color because they contain mostly old stars .
Most contain very little gas and dust because the material has already formed into stars .
Look at the galaxy in Figure 26.11 .
This can occur either by the pull of a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy .
This is the galaxy where we all live .
The Milky Way Galaxy looks different to us than other galaxies because our view is from inside of it !
The Milky Way Galaxy is a spiral galaxy that contains about 400 billion stars .
Our solar system orbits the center of the galaxy as the galaxy spins .
One orbit of the solar system takes about 225 to 250 million years .
The solar system has orbited 20 to 25 times since it formed 4.6 billion years ago .
Some astronomers think that there is a gigantic black hole at the center of the galaxy .
Figure 26.13 shows what the Milky Way probably looks like from the outside .
We are a little more than halfway out from the center of the Galaxy to the edge , as shown in Figure 26.13 .
All rocks on Earth change , but these changes usually happen very slowly .
Some changes happen below Earths surface .
The minerals may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope .
A rock may be made of only one type of mineral .
More often rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals .
Rocks are named for the combinations of minerals they are made of and the ways those minerals came together .
Remember that different minerals form under different environmental conditions .
So the minerals in a rock contain clues about the conditions in which the rock formed -LRB- Figure 4.2 -RRB- .
Some changes happen above ground .
The rock cycle describes each of the main types of rocks , how they form and how they change .
Figure 4.1 shows how the three main rock types are related to each other .
The arrows within the circle show how one type of rock may change to rock of another type .
For example , igneous rock may break down into small pieces of sediment and become sedimentary rock .
Igneous rock may be buried within the Earth and become metamorphic rock .
Igneous rock may also change back to molten material and re-cool into a new igneous rock .
The rock experiences these changes within the Earth .
Rocks can be changed from one type to another , and the rock cycle describes how this happens .
Igneous rocks form when magma cools below Earths surface or lava cools at the surface -LRB- Figure 4.3 -RRB- .
Sedimentary rocks form when sediments are compacted and cemented together -LRB- Figure 4.4 -RRB- .
Some sedimentary rocks form the solid minerals left behind after a liquid evaporates .
Metamorphic rocks form when an existing rock is changed by heat or pressure .
Any type of rock can change and become a new type of rock .
Water , wind , ice , and even plants and animals all act to wear down rocks .
Over time they can break larger rocks into smaller pieces called sediments .
Moving water , wind , and glaciers then carry these pieces from one place to another .
The sediments are eventually dropped , or deposited , somewhere .
This forms a sedimentary rock .
This whole process can take hundreds or thousands of years .
This long word means to change form .
Existing rocks can be weathered and eroded to form sediments .
A rock undergoes metamorphism if it is exposed to extreme heat and pressure within the crust .
An interactive rock cycle diagram can be found here : The rock cycle really has no beginning or end .
The processes involved in the rock cycle take place over hundreds , thousands , or even millions of years .
Even though for us rocks are solid and unchanging , they slowly change all the time .
Rock can change by heat or pressure deep in Earths crust .
There are three main processes that can change rock : Cooling and forming crystals .
Deep within the Earth , temperatures can get hot enough to melt rock .
This molten material is called magma .
As it cools , crystals grow , forming an igneous rock .
The crystals will grow larger if the magma cools slowly , as it does if it remains deep within the Earth .
If the magma cools quickly , the crystals will be very small .
Igneous rocks form when magma cools and forms crystals .
These rocks can form at Earths surface or deep underground .
The lava cools quickly as it pours out onto the surface -LRB- Figure
Figure 4.7 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada that consists entirely of granite .
Intrusive igneous rocks cool and form into crystals beneath the surface .
Deep in the Earth , magma cools slowly .
Slow cooling gives large crystals a chance to form .
Extrusive igneous rocks form above the surface .
Igneous rocks are grouped by the size of their crystals and the minerals they contain .
The minerals in igneous rocks are grouped into families .
Some contain mostly lighter colored minerals , some have a combination of light and dark minerals , and some have mostly darker minerals .
The combination of minerals is determined by the composition of the magma .
Magmas that produce lighter colored minerals are higher in silica .
These create rocks such as granite and rhyolite .
Darker colored minerals are found in rocks such as gabbro and basalt .
Most sedimentary rocks form from sediments .
A layer of sediment is deposited .
Then the next layer is deposited on top of that layer .
Sediments are deposited in many different types of environments .
Beaches and deserts collect large deposits of sand .
Avalanches produce large piles of sediment .
The environment where the sediments are deposited determines the type of sedimentary rock that can form .
Sedimentary rocks may include fossils .
Fossils are materials left behind by once-living organisms .
Most often , sediments settle out of water -LRB- Figure 4.13 -RRB- .
For example , rivers carry lots of sediment .
Where the water slows , it dumps these sediments along its banks , into lakes and the ocean .
When sediments settle out of water , they form horizontal layers .
Sedimentary rocks form in two ways .
Particles may be cemented together .
Over time , deposited sediments may harden into rock .
In conglomerate , the stones are rounded .
Sandstone is made of sand-sized particles .
Siltstone is made of smaller particles .
Shale is made mostly of clay-sized particles and hardened mud .
Next , the sediments are cemented together .
Minerals fill in the spaces between the loose sediment particles .
These cementing minerals come from the water that moves through the sediments .
These types of sedimentary rocks are called clastic rocks .
Clastic rocks are rock fragments that are compacted and cemented together .
Clastic sedimentary rocks are grouped by the size of the sediment they contain .
Conglomerate and breccia are made of individual stones that have been cemented together .
Chemical sedimentary rocks form when crystals precipitate out from a liquid .
The mineral halite , also called rock salt , forms this way .
Leave a shallow dish of salt water out in the Sun .
As the water evaporates , salt crystals form in the dish .
Table 4.1 shows some common types of sedimentary rocks and the types of sediments that make them up .
Metamorphic rocks start off as some kind of rock .
If pressure is exerted from all directions , the rock usually does not show foliation .
Contact metamorphism results when magma contacts a rock , changing it by extreme heat -LRB- Figure 4.14 -RRB- .
Regional metamorphism occurs over a wide area .
The rock may also be compressed by other geological processes .
Metamorphism does not cause a rock to melt completely .
It only causes the minerals to change by heat or pressure .
Heat and/or pressure then change the rocks physical or chemical makeup .
Hornfels is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism -LRB- Figure 4.14 -RRB- .
The result is that the rock becomes banded .
During metamorphism a rock may change chemically .
Extreme pressure may lead to physical changes like foliation .
If pressure is exerted from one direction , the rock forms layers .
Marble is used for statues and decorative items like vases -LRB- Figure 4.16 -RRB- .
Quartzite is very hard and is often crushed and used in building railroad tracks .
Schist and slate are sometimes used as building and landscape materials .
Almost all energy comes from the Sun .
Plants make food energy from sunlight .
Fossil fuels are made of the remains of plants and animals that stored the Suns energy millions of years ago .
The Sun heats some areas more than others , which causes wind .
The Suns energy also drives the water cycle , which moves water over the surface of the Earth .
Both wind and water power can be used as renewable resources .
Earths internal heat does not depend on the Sun for energy .
This heat comes from remnant heat when the planet formed .
Energy provides the ability to move or change matter from one state to another -LRB- for example , from solid to liquid -RRB- .
Every living thing needs energy to live and grow .
Your body gets its energy from food , but that is only a small part of the energy you use every day .
Cooking your food takes energy , and so does keeping it cold in the refrigerator or the freezer .
Billions of people all around the world use energy , so there is a huge demand for resources to provide all of this energy .
The main reason is that almost everything that happens on Earth involves energy .
But the total amount of energy always stays the same .
Scientists observed that energy could change from one form to another .
Here is an example of how energy changes form : kicking a soccer ball .
Your body gets energy from food .
Your muscles move your leg , your foot kicks the ball , and the ball gains kinetic energy -LRB- Figure 5.1 -RRB- .
The kinetic energy was converted from potential energy that was in your leg before the kick .
The action of kicking the ball is energy changing forms .
The same is true for anything that involves change .
Where does the food get its energy ?
If youre eating a plant , then the energy comes directly from the Sun .
If youre eating an animal , then the energy comes from a plant that got its energy from the Sun .
When you are about to kick the ball , the energy must be changed again .
When your leg is poised to kick the ball but is not yet moving , your leg has potential energy .
Heat is given off when fuel is burned .
The energy to make the electricity comes from fuel .
Fuel stores the energy and releases it when it is needed .
Fuel is any material that can release energy in a chemical change .
Gasoline and diesel fuel are fuels that provide the energy for most cars , trucks , and buses .
For fuel to be useful , its energy must be released in a way that can be controlled .
Energy resources can be put into two categories renewable or non-renewable .
Nonrenewable resources are used faster than they can be replaced .
Renewable resources can be replaced as quickly as they are used .
If a flashlight when ordinary batteries goes dead , the batteries need to be replaced .
But if the flashlight has rechargeable batteries , the batteries can be placed in a charger .
Once recharged , the batteries can be put back into the flashlight .
Rechargeable batteries can be used again and again -LRB- Figure 5.2 -RRB- .
Fossil fuels include coal , oil , and natural gas .
Millions of years ago , plants used energy from the Sun to form carbon compounds .
These compounds were later transformed into coal , oil , or natural gas .
Fossil fuels take millions of years to form .
Burning fossil fuels releases large amounts of pollution .
Renewable energy resources include solar , water , wind , biomass , and geothermal power .
These resources are usually replaced at the same rate that we use them .
Geothermal energy uses water that was heated by hot rocks .
Even renewable resources can be used unsustainably .
As the technology improves and more people use renewable energy , the prices will come down .
The cost of renewable resources will go down relative to fossil fuels as we use fossil fuels up .
In the long run renewable resources will need to make up a large amount of what we use .
Scientists know that the Sun will continue to shine for billions of years .
Water flows from high places to lower ones .
We can count on wind and water to continue to flow !
Changing grains into biofuels is biomass energy .
Is there a practical way to turn the resource into useful form of energy ?
Mining the resource may cause a lot of health problems or environmental damage .
Using the resource may create a large amount of pollution .
Today we rely on electricity more than ever , but the resources that currently supply our power are finite .
The race is on to harness more renewable resources , but getting all that clean energy from production sites to homes and businesses is proving to be a major challenge .
Learn more by watching the resource below : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Fossil fuels are made from plants and animals that lived hundreds of millions of years ago .
Their remains settled onto the ground and at the bottom of the sea .
Eventually , the layers were buried very deeply .
Over millions of years , the organic material turned into fossil fuels .
Fossil fuels are compounds of carbon and hydrogen , called hydrocarbons .
Coal is useful as a fuel , especially for generating electricity .
Coal forms from dead plants that settled at the bottom of swamps millions of years ago .
Water and mud in the swamp kept oxygen away from the plant material .
Sand and clay settled on top of the decaying plants .
The weight of this material squeezed out the water and some other substances .
Over time , the organic material became a carbon-rich rock .
Coal is a black or brownish-black rock that burns easily -LRB- Figure 5.3 -RRB- .
That is because it is exposed to higher temperature and pressure as it forms .
Coal is mostly carbon , but some other elements can be found in coal , including sulfur .
Sulfuric acid gets into nearby streams and can kill fish , plants , and animals .
Miners are sometimes killed if there is an explosion or a mine collapse .
Miners breathe in coal dust and can get terrible lung diseases after a number of years in the mines .
Coal has to be mined to get it out of the ground .
Coal mining affects the environment and human health .
Coal mining can take place underground or at the surface .
Surface mining exposes minerals that were underground to air and water at the surface .
These minerals contain the chemical element sulfur .
Sulfur mixes with air and water to make sulfuric acid .
To prepare coal for use , the coal is first crushed into powder and burned in a furnace .
The heat from the burning coal is used to boil water .
This makes steam .
The steam spins turbines , which creates electricity .
Oil is currently the most commonly used source of energy in the world .
Tiny organisms like plankton and algae die and settle to the bottom of the sea .
Sediments settle over the organic material .
Oxygen is kept away by the sediments .
When the material is buried deep enough , it is exposed to high heat and pressure .
Over millions of years , the organic material transforms into liquid oil .
The United States produces only about one-quarter as much oil as it uses .
The main oil producing regions in the U.S. are the Gulf of Mexico , Texas , Alaska , and California .
Geologists look for oil in folded layers of rock called anticlines .
Oil moves through permeable rock and is trapped by the impermeable cap rock .
Oil comes out of the ground as crude oil .
Oil is separated into different compounds at an oil refinery -LRB- Figure 5.4 -RRB- .
These fuels provide about 90 % of the energy used for transportation around the world .
This forces the pistons inside the engine to move .
The engine makes enough power to move the car .
This is important because the more something weighs , the more energy is needed to move it .
If gasoline could only provide a little energy , a car would have to carry a lot of it to be able to travel very far .
Or the car would need to be filled up frequently .
As gasoline burns , it releases most of its energy as heat .
The heat makes the gases expand .
Using gasoline to power automobiles affects the environment .
These pollutants include smog and ground-level ozone .
Air pollution is a big problem for cities where large numbers of people drive every day .
Burning gasoline also produces carbon dioxide .
Similar pollutants come from other forms of oil .
Natural gas is often found along with coal or oil in underground deposits .
Natural gas must be processed before it can be used as a fuel .
Natural gas is delivered to homes , where it is used for cooking and heating .
Natural gas is also a major energy source for powering turbines to make electricity .
The power plant is able to use this heat , either in the form of hot gases or steam , to spin turbines .
The spinning turbines turn generators , and the generators create electricity .
Still , natural gas does emit pollutants .
That makes coal the biggest contributor to global warming .
Another problem with coal is that most coal contains sulfur .
As it burns , the sulfur goes into the air as sulfur dioxide .
Burning coal also puts a large number of small solid particulates into the air .
People with asthma may end up in the hospital on days when particulate pollution is high .
Since these fuels burn so easily , a natural gas leak in a building or an underground pipe can lead to a deadly explosion .
Using fossil fuels affects the environment in a variety of ways .
Burning these fuels causes air pollution .
These fuels release carbon dioxide , which is a major factor in global warming -LRB- Figure 5.5 -RRB- .
Burning coal releases more carbon dioxide than either oil or natural gas .
Nuclear power plants use uranium that has been concentrated in fuel rods -LRB- Figure 5.6 -RRB- .
The uranium atoms are split apart when they are hit by other extremely tiny particles .
These particles must be controlled or they would cause a dangerous explosion .
Nuclear power plants use the energy they produce to heat water .
The water turns into steam , which causes a turbine to spin .
This in turn produces electricity .
For example , France gets about 80 % of its electricity from nuclear energy .
In the United States , a little less than 20 % of electricity comes from nuclear energy .
If there are no accidents , a nuclear power plant releases nothing but steam into the air .
But nuclear energy does create other environmental problems .
Splitting atoms creates dangerous radioactive waste .
These wastes can remain dangerous for hundreds of thousands of years .
Scientists and engineers are still looking for ways to keep this waste safely away from people .
Nuclear power has no pollutants including carbon emissions , but power plants are not always safe and the long-term disposal of wastes is a problem that has not yet been solved .
Find out more at : http://science.kqed.org/ques MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
This releases huge amounts of energy .
The energy travels to the Earth mostly as visible light .
The energy is carried through the empty space by radiation .
Solar energy has been used on a small scale for hundreds of years .
Solar power plants are being built in many locations around the world .
In the United States , the southwestern deserts are well suited for solar plants .
Sunlight is turned into electricity at a solar power plant .
These power plants use a large group of mirrors to focus sunlight on one place .
This place is called a receiver -LRB- Figure 5.8 -RRB- .
At the receiver , a liquid such as oil or water is heated to a high temperature .
At a solar power plant , the energy conducted by the heated liquid is used to make electricity .
Solar energy is used to heat homes and water , and to make electricity .
Scientists and engineers have many ways to get energy from the Sun -LRB- Figure 5.9 -RRB- .
Solar cells are devices that turn sunlight directly into electricity .
Lots of solar cells make up an individual solar panel .
The Suns heat can also be trapped in your home by using south facing windows and good insulation .
A special battery is needed to store extra energy during the day for use at night .
Until solar technology becomes more affordable , most people will prefer to get their energy from other sources .
That energy is used to make electricity .
Hydroelectric power harnesses the energy of water moving down a stream .
This abundant energy source provides almost one fifth of the worlds electricity .
The energy of waves and tides can also be used to produce water power .
To harness water power , a stream must be dammed .
While sitting in the reservoir behind the dam , the water has potential energy .
Water is allowed to flow downhill into a large turbine .
While flowing downhill , the water has kinetic energy .
Kinetic energy makes the turbine spin .
The turbine is connected to a generator , which makes electricity .
Many of the suitable streams in the United States have been developed for hydroelectric power .
Water power does not burn a fuel .
Dams slow the release of silt .
Downstream deltas retreat and beaches may be starved of sand .
Seaside cities may become exposed to storms and rising sea levels .
Tidal power stations may need to close off a narrow bay or estuary .
Wave power plants must withstand coastal storms and the corrosion of seawater .
Water keeps flowing downhill .
Water power does have problems .
A large dam stops a streams flow , which floods the land upstream .
The dams and turbines also change the downstream environment .
Although not yet widely used , many believe tidal power has more potential than wind or solar power for meeting alternative energy needs .
Quest radio looks at plans for harnessing power from the sea by San Francisco and along the northern California coast .
The energy from the Sun creates wind -LRB- Figure 5.11 -RRB- .
The Sun heats some locations more than others .
Warm air rises , so other air rushes in to fill the hole left by the rising air .
This horizontal movement of air is called wind .
Wind power uses moving air as a source of energy .
People have used windmills to grind grain and pump water for hundreds of years .
Sailing ships have depended on wind for millennia .
Wind is now used to generate electricity .
Moving air can make a turbine spin , just like moving water can .
When wind hits the blades of the turbine , the kinetic energy makes the blades move .
The turbine spins and creates electricity .
Many states are currently using wind power .
Wind turbines are set up in mountain passes .
This is common in California , where cool Pacific Ocean air is sucked across the passes and into the warmer inland valleys .
Wind does not blow all of the time , so wind energy must be stored for later use .
Finally , windmills are not welcomed by residents of some locations .
Biomass includes wood , grains , and other plant materials or waste materials .
Because living plants take carbon dioxide out of the air , growing plants for biofuel can mean that we will put less of this gas into the air overall .
This could help us do something about the problem of global warming .
People can burn wood directly for energy in the form of heat .
Biomass can also be processed to make biofuel .
Biofuel is a fairly new type of energy that is becoming more popular .
Biomass is useful because it can be made liquid .
Some car engines can be powered by pure vegetable oil or even recycled vegetable oil .
Sometimes the exhaust from these cars smells like French fries !
Hot springs and geysers are produced by water that is heated by magma or hot rock below the surface .
At a geothermal power plant , engineers drill wells into the hot rocks .
Hot water or steam may come up through the wells .
Alternatively , water may be put down into the well to be heated .
The hot water or steam makes a turbine spin .
This makes electricity .
Because the hot water or steam can be used directly to make a turbine spin , geothermal energy can be used without processing .
There will always be hot rocks and water can be pumped down into a well .
Iceland is gets about one fourth of its electricity from geothermal sources .
In the United States , California leads all states in producing geothermal energy .
Geothermal energy in California is concentrated in the northern part of the state .
Where Earths internal heat gets close to the surface , geothermal power is a clean source of energy .
Wegener believed that the continents were once all joined together .
Wegener suggested that Pangaea broke up long ago .
Since then , the continents have been moving to their current positions .
Wegener and his supporters collected a great deal of evidence for the continental drift hypothesis .
Wegener found that this evidence was best explained if the continents had at one time been joined together .
Wegener found rocks of the same type and age on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean .
He thought that the rocks formed side by side .
These rocks then drifted apart on separate continents .
Wegener also matched up mountain ranges across the Atlantic Ocean .
This mountain range broke apart as the continents split up .
The mountain range separated as the continents drifted .
Wegener also found evidence for continental drift from fossils -LRB- Figure 6.7 -RRB- .
The same type of plant and animal fossils are found on continents that are now widely separated .
Wegener thought that all of these organisms lived side by side .
The lands later moved apart so that the fossils are separated .
These organisms would not have been able to travel across the oceans .
Fossils of the seed fern Glossopteris are found across all of the southern continents .
These seeds are too heavy to be carried across the ocean by wind .
Mesosaurus fossils are found in South America and South Africa .
Mesosaurus could swim , but only in fresh water .
Cynognathus and Lystrosaurus were reptiles that lived on land .
Their fossils have been found across South America , Africa , India and Antarctica .
Wegener also looked at evidence from ancient glaciers .
Glaciers are found in very cold climates near the poles .
The evidence left by some ancient glaciers is very close to the equator .
Wegener knew that this was impossible !
However , if the continents had moved , the glaciers would have been centered close to the South Pole .
Coal swamps are also found in tropical and subtropical environments .
Wegener discovered ancient coal seams and coral reef fossils in areas that are much too cold today .
Wegener thought that the continents have moved since the time of Pangaea .
Some important evidence for continental drift came after Wegeners death .
Earths magnetic field surrounds the planet from pole to pole .
The compass needle aligns with Earths magnetic field -LRB- Figure 6.8 -RRB- .
Some rocks contain little compasses too !
Stress is the force applied to a rock .
There are four types of stresses : Confining stress happens as weight of all the overlying rock pushes down on a deeply buried rock .
Tension is the major type of stress found at divergent plate boundaries .
Shear stress happens when forces slide past each other in opposite directions -LRB- Figure 7.2 -RRB- .
This is the most common stress found at transform plate boundaries .
A rock behaves like a stretched rubber band .
When the stress stops , the rock goes back to its original shape .
If more stress is applied to the rock , it bends and flows .
The rock is being pushed in from all sides , which compresses it .
Near the surface , if the stress continues , the rock will fracture and break .
The rock will not deform because there is no place for it to move .
Compression stress squeezes rocks together .
Compression causes rocks to fold or fracture -LRB- Figure 7.1 -RRB- .
When two cars collide , compression causes them to crumple .
Tension stress pulls rocks apart .
Tension causes rocks to lengthen or break apart .
Sedimentary rocks are formed in horizontal layers .
This is magnificently displayed around the southwestern United States .
The arid climate allows rock layers to be well exposed -LRB- Figure 7.4 -RRB- .
Folds , joints and faults are caused by stresses .
If a sedimentary rock is tilted or folded , we know that stresses have changed the rock -LRB- Figure 7.6 -RRB- .
Deep within the Earth , as plates collide , rocks crumple into folds .
You can model these folds by placing your hands on opposite edges of a piece of cloth and pushing your hands together .
The rocks dip away from the center of the fold -LRB- Figure 7.8 -RRB- .
The oldest rocks are found at the center of an anticline .
When upward folding rocks form a circular structure , that structure is called a dome .
If the top of the dome is eroded off , the oldest rocks are exposed at the center .
A syncline is a fold that bends downward -LRB- Figure 7.9 -RRB- .
When rocks bend downward in a circular structure , it is called a basin .
In sedimentary rocks , you can easily trace the folding of the layers .
Once rocks are folded , they do not return to their original shape .
An anticline is a fold that arches upward .
The fracture is called a joint if the rock breaks but doesnt move , as shown in Figure 7.10 .
Rocks can slip many miles along thrust faults -LRB- Figure 7.13 -RRB- .
If the rocks on one or both sides of a fracture move , the fracture is called a fault -LRB- Figure 7.11 -RRB- .
Faults can occur alone or in clusters , creating a fault zone .
Earthquakes happen when rocks break and move suddenly .
The energy released causes an earthquake .
Slip is the distance rocks move along a fault , as one block of rock moves past the other .
The angle of a fault is called When compression squeezes the crust into a smaller space , the hanging wall pushes up relative to the footwall .
This creates a reverse fault .
Strike-slip faults result from shear stresses .
If your right foot moves toward you , the fault is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault .
As you can see , California will not fall into the ocean someday .
The land west of the San Andreas Fault is moving northeastward , while the North American plate moves southwest .
Many processes create mountains .
Most mountains form along plate boundaries .
A few mountains may form in the middle of a plate .
For example , huge volcanoes are mountains formed at hotspots within the Pacific Plate .
Most of the worlds largest mountains form as plates collide at convergent plate boundaries .
Continents are too buoyant to get pushed down into the mantle .
So when the plates smash together , the crust crumples upwards .
This creates mountains .
The worlds highest mountain range , the Himalayas , is growing as India collides with Eurasia .
About 80 million years ago , India was separated from Eurasia by an ocean -LRB- Figure 7.16 -RRB- .
As the plates collided , pieces of the old seafloor were forced over the Asian continent .
This old seafloor is now found high in the Himalayas -LRB- Figure 7.17 -RRB- .
Volcanic mountain ranges form when oceanic crust is pushed down into the mantle at convergent plate boundaries .
Mid-ocean ridges form at divergent plate boundaries .
As the ocean floor separates an enormous line of volcanoes is created .
When continental crust is pulled apart , it breaks into blocks .
These blocks of crust are separated by normal faults .
This topography is known as basin-and-range -LRB- Figure 7.19 -RRB- .
Extrusive igneous rocks cool at the surface .
Intrusive igneous rocks cool below the surface .
These rocks do not always remain hidden .
Rocks that formed in the crust are exposed when the rock and sediment that covers them is eroded away .
It often stays right in the middle of a crater at the top of a volcano .
Here the lava creates a large , round lava dome -LRB- Figure
A lava plateau is made of a large amount of fluid lava .
The lava flows over a large area and cools .
This creates a large , flat surface of igneous rock .
The Columbia Plateau covers over 161,000 square kilometers -LRB- 63,000 square miles -RRB- .
Thin , fluid lava created the rock that makes up the entire ocean floor .
New land is created in volcanic eruptions .
These volcanoes formed from fluid lava -LRB- Figure 8.21 -RRB- .
The island grows as lava is added on the coast .
New land may also emerge from lava that erupts from beneath the water .
Magma that cools underground forms intrusions -LRB- Figure 8.22 -RRB- .
Intrusions become land formations if they are exposed at the surface by erosion .
Water works its way through porous rocks or soil .
Sometimes this water is heated by nearby magma .
If the water makes its way to the surface , it forms a hot spring or a geyser .
When hot water gently rises to the surface , it creates a hot spring .
A hot spring forms where a crack in the Earth allows water to reach the surface after being heated underground .
Many hot springs are used by people as natural hot tubs .
Some people believe that hot springs can cure illnesses .
Hot springs are found all over the world , even in Antarctica !
Geysers are also created by water that is heated beneath the Earths surface .
The water may become superheated by magma .
The heat and pressure build as more water is added .
Only about 1,000 geysers exist worldwide .
Weathering causes rocks at the Earths surface to change form .
The new minerals that form are stable at the Earths surface .
The rock has broken without changing its composition .
You could use the expression a chip off the old block to describe mechanical weathering !
Rocks can break apart into smaller pieces in many ways .
Ice wedging is common where water goes above and below its freezing point -LRB- Figure 9.2 -RRB- .
Most substances get smaller when they change from a liquid to a solid . -RRB-
This can happen in winter in the mid-latitudes or in colder climates in summer .
When liquid water changes into solid ice , it increases in volume .
You see this when you fill an ice cube tray with water and put it in the freezer .
The ice cubes go to a higher level in the tray than the water .
You also may have seen this if you put a can of soda into the freezer so that it cools down quickly .
If you leave the can in the freezer too long , the liquid expands so much that it bends or pops the can .
Gravity causes abrasion as a rock tumbles down a slope .
Moving water causes abrasion it moves rocks so that they bump against one another -LRB- Figure 9.3 -RRB- .
Strong winds cause abrasion by blasting sand against rock surfaces .
Finally , the ice in glaciers cause abrasion .
Sometimes biological elements cause mechanical weathering .
This can happen slowly .
A plants roots grow into a crack in rock .
As the roots grow larger , they wedge open the crack .
Burrowing animals can also cause weathering .
By digging for food or creating a hole to live in the animal may break apart rock .
Today , human beings do a lot of mechanical weathering whenever we dig or blast into rock .
It would be hard to get a big chunk of chocolate to dissolve in your milk or hot water .
Maybe you could make hot chocolate from some smaller pieces like chocolate chips , but it is much easier to add a powder to your milk .
Smaller pieces dissolve more easily .
Chemical weathering works through chemical reactions that change the rock .
That makes it a double agent !
Each of these is discussed below .
The rock changes composition and becomes a different type of rock .
Most minerals form at high pressure or high temperatures deep within Earth .
Thats why chemical weathering happens .
Minerals that formed at higher temperature and pressure change into minerals that are stable at the surface .
It is made of just two hydrogen atoms bonded to one oxygen atom .
Lots of things dissolve easily in water .
Other minerals change by adding water into their structure .
Carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- combines with water as raindrops fall through the air .
This makes a weak acid , called carbonic acid .
Acid rain accelerates chemical weathering .
This happens so often that carbonic acid is a common , weak acid found in nature .
This acid works to dissolve rock .
While this is normal , more acids are made when we add pollutants to the air .
Any time we burn any fossil fuel , it adds nitrous oxide to the air .
As nitrous oxide and sulfur dioxide react with water , they form nitric acid and sulfuric acid .
Oxygen strongly reacts with elements at the Earths surface .
You are probably most familiar with the rust that forms when iron reacts with oxygen -LRB- Figure 9.4 -RRB- .
Plants and animals also cause chemical weathering .
As plant roots take in nutrients , elements are exchanged .
Minerals also weather differently .
Some minerals completely dissolve in water .
As less resistant minerals dissolve away , a rocks surface becomes pitted and rough .
When a less resistant mineral dissolves , more resistant mineral grains are released from the rock .
Igneous rocks tend to weather slowly because they are hard .
Water can not easily penetrate them .
Other types of rock are easily weathered because they dissolve easily in weak acids .
Limestone is a sedimentary rock that dissolves easily .
When softer rocks wear away , the more resistant rocks form ridges or hills .
Devils Tower in Wyoming shows how different types of rock weather at different rates -LRB- Figure 9.5 -RRB- .
The softer materials of the surrounding rocks were worn away .
Acid rain is caused by sulfur and nitrogen oxides emanating from power plants or metal refineries .
The smokestacks have been built tall so that pollutants dont sit over cities -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
As they move , these pollutants combine with water vapor to form sulfuric and nitric acids .
The acid droplets form acid fog , rain , snow , or they may be deposited dry .
Acidity is measured on the pH scale .
Acid precipitation ends up on the land surface and in water bodies .
Acid droplets move down through acidic soils to lower the pH of streams and lakes even more .
Acids strip soil of metals and nutrients , which collect in streams and lakes .
As a result , stripped soils may no longer provide the nutrients that native plants need .
A pH scale goes from 1 to 14 ; numbers are shown with the pH of some common substances .
Lower numbers are more acidic and higher numbers are less acidic -LRB- also called more alkaline -RRB- -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
A small change in pH represents a large change in acidity : rain with a pH of 4.6 is 10 times more acidic than normal rain -LRB- with a pH of 5.6 -RRB- .
The acidity of average rainwater in the northeastern United States has fallen to between 4.0 and 4.6 .
Acid rain takes a toll on ecosystems -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Plants that are exposed to acids become weak and are more likely to be damaged by bad weather , insect pests , or disease .
Acid rain has killed trees in this forest in the Czech Republic .
These include the U.S. Capitol and many buildings in Europe , such as Westminster Abbey .
Carbonate rocks neutralize acids and so some regions do not suffer the effects of acid rain nearly as much .
Limestone in the midwestern United States protects the area .
All the rain that falls in Sweden is acidic and fish in lakes all over the country are dying .
The pollutants come from the United Kingdom and Western Europe , which are now working to decrease their emissions .
Snails die in acid soils , so songbirds do not have as much food to eat .
Canada also suffers from acid rain that originates in the United States , a problem that is also improving .
Southeast Asia is experiencing more acid rain between nations as the region industrializes .
Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Young birds and mammals do not build bones as well and may not be as strong .
As lakes become acidic , organisms die off .
No fish can live if the pH drops below 4.5 .
Organic material can not decay , and mosses take over the lake .
Wildlife that depend on the lake for drinking water suffer population declines .
Crops are damaged by acid rain .
The characteristics of an organism that help it to survive in a given environment are called adaptations .
Adaptations are traits that an organism inherits from its parents .
Within a population of organisms are genes coding for a certain number of traits .
Adaptations develop when certain variations or differences in a population help some members survive better than others -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The variation may already exist within the population , but often the variation comes from a mutation , or a random change in an organisms genes .
Some mutations are harmful and the organism dies ; in that case , the variation will not remain in the population .
Many mutations are neutral and remain in the population .
If the environment changes , the mutation may be beneficial and it may help the organism adapt to the environment .
Many changes in the genetic makeup of a species may accumulate over time , especially if the environment is changing .
Eventually the descendants will be very different from their ancestors and may become a whole new species .
Changes in the genetic makeup of a species over time are known as biological evolution .
Traits become more or less common in a population depending on whether they are beneficial or harmful .
An example of evolution by natural selection can be found in the deer mouse , species Peromyscus maniculatus .
In Nebraska this mouse is typically brown , but after glaciers carried lighter sand over the darker soil in the Sand Hills , predators could more easily spot the dark mice .
Natural selection favored the light mice , and over time , the population became light colored .
During the 18th and 19th centuries , geologists tried to estimate the age of Earth with indirect techniques .
What Kelvin didnt know is that radioactive decay of elements inside Earths interior provides a steady source of heat .
Thomson had grossly underestimated Earths age .
One example is that by measuring how much sediment a stream deposited in a year , a geologist might try to determine how long it took for a stream to deposit an ancient sediment layer .
Not surprisingly , these methods resulted in wildly different estimates .
A relatively good estimate was produced by the British geologist Charles Lyell , who thought that 240 million years had passed since the appearance of the first animals with shells .
Today scientists know that this event occurred about 530 million years ago .
In 1892 , William Thomson -LRB- later known as Lord Kelvin -RRB- calculated that the Earth was 100 million years old , which he later lowered to 20 million years .
He did this systematically assuming that the planet started off as a molten ball and calculating the time it would take for it to cool to its current temperature .
This estimate was a blow to geologists and supporters of Charles Darwins theory of evolution , which required an older Earth to provide time for geological and evolutionary processes to take place .
Kelvins calculations were soon shown to be flawed when radioactivity was discovered in 1896 .
Radioactivity turned out to be useful for dating Earth materials and for coming up with a quantitative age for Earth .
Scientists not only date ancient rocks from Earths crust , they also date meteorites that formed at the same time Earth and the rest of the solar system were forming .
Moon rocks also have been radiometrically dated .
Using a combination of radiometric dating , index fossils , and superposition , geologists have constructed a well - defined timeline of Earth history .
With information gathered from all over the world , estimates of rock and fossil ages have become increasingly accurate .
Every major advance in agriculture has allowed global population to increase .
Early farmers could settle down to a steady food supply .
Irrigation , the ability to clear large swaths of land for farming efficiently , and the development of farm machines powered by fossil fuels allowed people to grow more food and transport it to where it was needed .
Are humans now exceeding Earths carrying capacity for our species ?
Many anthropologists say that the carrying capacity of humans on the planet without agriculture is about 10 million -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
This population was reached about 10,000 years ago .
At the time , people lived together in small bands of hunters and gatherers .
Typically men hunted and fished ; women gathered nuts and vegetables .
Obviously , human populations have blown past this hypothetical carrying capacity .
What have been the important developments that have allowed population to grow ?
Farming increased the yield of food plants and allowed people to have food available year round .
Animals were domesticated to provide meat .
With agriculture , people could settle down , so that they no longer needed to carry all their possessions -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Agriculture allowed people to settle in towns and cities .
More advanced farming practices allowed a single farmer to grow food for many more people .
When advanced farming practices allowed farmers to grow more food than they needed for their families -LRB- Figure
The next major stage in the growth of the human population was the Industrial Revolution , which started in the late 1700s -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
This major historical event marks when products were first mass-produced and when fossil fuels were first widely used for power .
The Green Revolution has allowed the addition of billions of people to the population in the past few decades .
The Green Revolution has improved agricultural productivity by : Improving crops by selecting for traits that promote productivity ; recently , genetically engineered crops have been introduced .
The Green Revolution has increased the productivity of farms immensely .
A century ago , a single farmer produced enough food for 2.5 people , but now a farmer can feed more than 130 people .
The Green Revolution is credited for feeding 1 billion people that would not otherwise have been able to live .
About 23 times more fertilizer and 50 times more pesticides are used around the world than were used just 50 years ago -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
About 17 % of the energy used each year in the United States is for agriculture .
Many farming regions depend on groundwater , which is not a renewable resource .
Some regions will eventually run out of this water source .
Currently about 70 % of the worlds fresh water is used for agriculture .
The flip side to this is that for the population to continue to grow , more advances in agriculture and an ever increasing supply of water will be needed .
Weve increased the carrying capacity for humans by our genius : growing crops , trading for needed materials , and designing ways to exploit resources that are difficult to get at , such as groundwater .
In the eighteenth century , Thomas Malthus predicted that human population would continue to grow until we had exhausted our resources .
At that point , humans would become victims of famine , disease , or war .
Some scientists think that the carrying capacity of the planet is about 1 billion people , not the 7 billion people we have today .
The limiting factors have changed as our intelligence has allowed us to expand our population .
Pollutants include materials that are naturally occurring but are added to the atmosphere so that they are there in larger quantities than normal .
Air pollution started to be a problem when early people burned wood for heat and cooking fires in enclosed spaces such as caves and small tents or houses .
But the problems became more widespread as fossil fuels such as coal began to be burned during the Industrial Revolution .
But the problems became more widespread as fossil fuels such as coal began to be burned during the Industrial Revolution -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The 2012 Olympic Games in London opening ceremony contained a reen - actment of the Industrial Revolution - complete with pollution streaming from smokestacks .
Photochemical smog , a different type of air pollution , first became a problem in Southern California after World War II .
The abundance of cars and sunshine provided the perfect setting for a chemical reaction between some of the molecules in auto exhaust or oil refinery emissions and sunshine -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Photochemical smog consists of more than 100 compounds , most importantly ozone .
Smog over Los Angeles as viewed from the Hollywood Hills .
Terrible air pollution events in Pennsylvania and London , in which many people died , plus the recognition of the hazards of photochemical smog , led to the passage of the Clean Air Act in 1970 in the United States .
The act now regulates 189 pollutants .
Other important regulated pollutants include benzene , perchloroethylene , methylene chloride , dioxin , asbestos , toluene , and metals such as cadmium , mercury , chromium , and lead compounds .
Visibility is better and people are no longer incapacitated by industrial smog .
However , despite the Act , industry , power plants , and vehicles put 160 million tons of pollutants into the air each year .
Some of this smog is invisible and some contributes to the orange or blue haze that affects many cities .
Air quality in a region is not just affected by the amount of pollutants released into the atmosphere in that location but by other geographical and atmospheric factors .
Winds can move pollutants into or out of a region and a mountain range can trap pollutants on its leeward side .
If the inversion lasts long enough , pollution can reach dangerous levels .
Pollutants remain over a region until they are transported out of the area by wind , diluted by air blown in from another region , transformed into other compounds , or carried to the ground when mixed with rain or snow .
The state has the right conditions for collecting pollutants including mountain ranges that trap smoggy air , arid and sometimes windless conditions , agriculture , industry , and lots and lots of cars .
Asteroids are very small , rocky bodies that orbit the Sun .
`` Asteroid '' means `` star-like , '' and in a telescope , asteroids look like points of light , just like stars .
Asteroids are irregularly shaped because they do not have enough gravity to become round .
Collisions with other bodies may break up the asteroid or create craters on its surface .
Early impacts caused the planets to grow as they cleared their portions of space .
An impact with an asteroid about the size of Mars caused fragments of Earth to fly into space and ultimately create the Moon .
Asteroid impacts are linked to mass extinctions throughout Earths history .
Hundreds of thousands of asteroids have been discovered in our solar system .
The majority of the asteroids are found in between the orbits of Mars In 1991 , Asteroid 951 Gaspra was the first asteroid photographed at close range .
and Jupiter , in a region called the asteroid belt , as shown in Figure 1.2 .
Although there are many thousands of asteroids in the asteroid belt , their total mass adds up to only about 4 % of Earths Moon .
Scientists think that the bodies in the asteroid belt formed during the formation of the solar system .
The asteroids might have come together to make a single planet , but they were pulled apart by the intense gravity of Jupiter .
More than 4,500 asteroids cross Earths orbit ; they are near-Earth asteroids .
Any object whose orbit crosses Earths can collide with Earth , and many asteroids do .
On average , each year a rock about 5-10 m in diameter hits Earth -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Since past asteroid impacts have been implicated in mass extinctions , astronomers are always on the lookout for new asteroids , and follow the known near-Earth asteroids closely , so they can predict a possible collision as early as possible .
A painting of what an asteroid a few kilometers across might look like as it strikes Earth .
Eventually asteroids could be mined for rare minerals or for construction projects in space .
A few missions have studied asteroids directly .
NASAs DAWN mission explored asteroid Vesta in 2011 and 2012 and will visit dwarf planet Ceres in 2015 .
URL : The NEAR Shoemaker probe took this photo as it was about to land on 433 Eros in 2001 .
Thousands of objects , including comets and asteroids , are zooming around our solar system ; some could be on a collision course with Earth .
QUEST explores how these Near Earth Objects are being tracked and what scientists are saying should be done to prevent a deadly impact .
From the table in the concept `` Materials Humans Use , '' you can see that many of the resources we depend on are non-renewable .
Non-renewable resources vary in their availability ; some are very abundant and others are rare .
Some resources are truly limited in quantity : when they are gone , they are gone , and something must be found that will replace them .
Besides abundance , a resources value is determined by how easy it is to locate and extract .
If a resource is difficult to use , it will not be used until the price for that resource becomes so great that it is worth paying for .
For example , the oceans are filled with an abundant supply of water , but desalination is costly , so it is used only where water is really limited -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Politics is also part of determining resource availability and cost .
Nations that have a desired resource in abundance will often export that resource to other countries , while countries that need that resource must import it from one of the countries that produces it .
This leads to a situation in which the availability and price of the oil is determined largely by one set of countries that have their own interests to look out for .
The topic of overconsumption was touched on in the chapter Life on Earth .
Many people in developed countries , such as the United States and most of Europe , use many more natural resources than people in many other countries .
Pollution from discarded materials de - grades the environment and reduces the availability of natural resources .
We have many luxury and recreational items , and it is often cheaper for us to throw something away than to fix it or just hang on to it for a while longer .
This consumerism leads to greater resource use , but it also leads to more waste .
Pollution from discarded materials degrades the land , air , and water -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Natural resource use is generally lower in developing countries because people can not afford many products .
Well go out on the research vessel -LRB- R/V in ship-speak -RRB- Atlantis , owned by the US Navy and operated by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution for the oceanographic community .
Scientists come from all over to meet a research ship in a port .
An oceanographer these days doesnt need to be near the ocean , he or she just needs to have access to an airport !
Lets begin this cruise in Woods Hole , Massachusetts , Atlantis home port .
Transit time to the research site can take days .
By doing this virtually , we dont have to spend days in transit to our research site , and we dont have to get seasick !
As we head to the site , we will run the echo sounder .
Most importantly , the ship has all of the heavy equipment necessary to deploy and operate Alvin , the manned research submersible .
The ship has 24 bunks available for scientists , including two for the chief scientists .
The majority of these bunks are below waterline , which makes for good sleeping in the daytime .
Ship time is really expensive research , so vessels operate all night and so do the scientists .
Alternately , if youre on the team doing a lot of diving in Alvin , you may just be up during the day .
If youre mostly doing operations that dont involve Alvin , you may just be up at night .
For safety reasons , Alvin is deployed and recovered only in daylight .
The people who first mapped the seafloor were aboard military vessels during World War II .
As stated in the Earth as a Planet chapter , echo sounders used sound waves to search for submarines , but also produced a map of seafloor depths .
Depth sounding continued in earnest after the war .
Scientists pieced together the ocean depths to produce bathymetric maps of the seafloor .
During WWII and in the decade or so later , echo sounders had only one beam , so they just returned a line showing the depth beneath the ship .
Later echo sounders sent out multiple beams and could create a bathymetric map of the seafloor below .
We will run a multi-beam echo sounder as we go from Woods Hole out to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge .
Although they expected an expanse of flat , featureless plains , scientists were shocked to find tremendous features like mountain ranges , rifts , and trenches .
This work continues on oceanographic research vessels as they sail across the seas today .
When they first observed these bathymetric maps , scientists wondered what had formed these features .
The major features of the ocean basins and their colors on the map in Figure 1.2 include : mid-ocean ridges : these features rise up high above the deep seafloor as a long chain of mountains , e.g.
rift zones : in the middle of the mid-ocean ridges is a rift zone that is lower in elevation than the mountains surrounding it .
deep sea trenches : these features are found at the edges of continents or in the sea near chains of active volcanoes , e.g.
abyssal plains : these features are flat areas , although many are dotted with volcanic mountains , e.g.
In fact , Earths tallest mountain is Mauna Kea volcano , which rises 10,203 m -LRB- 33,476 ft. -RRB- meters -RRB- from the Pacific Ocean floor to become one of the volcanic mountains of Hawaii .
The Big Bang theory is the most widely accepted cosmological explanation of how the universe formed .
If we start at the present and go back into the past , the universe is contracting getting smaller and smaller .
According to the Big Bang theory , the universe began about 13.7 billion years ago .
Everything that is now in the universe was squeezed into a very small volume .
An enormous explosion a big bang caused the universe to start expanding rapidly .
All the matter and energy in the universe , and even space itself , came out of this explosion .
As the universe expanded , it became less dense and began to cool .
But you are also looking across a different type of distance .
After only a few seconds , protons , neutrons , and electrons could form .
After a few minutes , those subatomic particles came together to create hydrogen .
Energy in the universe was great enough to initiate nuclear fusion , and hydrogen nuclei were fused into helium nuclei .
The first neutral atoms that included electrons did not form until about 380,000 years later .
The matter in the early universe was not smoothly distributed across space .
Dense clumps of matter held close together by gravity were spread around .
Eventually , these clumps formed countless trillions of stars , billions of galaxies , and other structures that now form most of the visible mass of the universe .
After the origin of the Big Bang hypothesis , many astronomers still thought the universe was static .
Nearly all came around when an important line of evidence for the Big Bang was discovered in 1964 .
In a static universe , the space between objects should have no heat at all ; the temperature should measure 0 K -LRB- Kelvin is an absolute temperature scale -RRB- .
But two researchers at Bell Laboratories used a microwave receiver to learn that the background radiation in the universe is not 0 K , but 3 K -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
This tiny amount of heat is left over from the Big Bang .
Since nearly Images from very far away show what the universe was like not too long after the Big Bang .
all astronomers now accept the Big Bang hypothesis , what is it usually referred to as ?
Protein , carbohydrates , and fats are all part of the body and all contain carbon .
When your body breaks down food to produce energy , you break down protein , carbohydrates , and fat , and you breathe out carbon dioxide .
Carbon occurs in many forms on Earth .
The element moves through organisms and then returns to the environment .
When all this happens in balance , the ecosystem remains in balance too .
The short term cycling of carbon begins with carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- in the atmosphere .
Through photosynthesis , the inorganic carbon in carbon dioxide plus water and energy from sunlight is transformed into organic carbon -LRB- food -RRB- with oxygen given off as a waste product .
Plants and animals engage in the reverse of photosynthesis , which is respiration .
In respiration , animals use oxygen to convert the organic carbon in sugar into food energy they can use .
Plants also go through respiration and consume some of the sugars they produce .
In photosynthesis , CO2 is converted to O2 ; in respiration , O2 is converted to CO2 .
Remember that plants do not create energy .
They change the energy from sunlight into chemical energy that plants and animals can use as food -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
A forest is a sink , but when the forest burns it becomes a source .
If more carbon is provided than stored , the place is a carbon source .
Carbon sinks are reservoirs where carbon is stored .
Healthy living forests and the oceans act as carbon sinks .
Carbon sources are reservoirs from which carbon can enter the environment .
A reservoir can change from a sink to a source and vice versa .
This means that a small increase or decrease in the atmospheric CO2 can have a large effect .
About 65 % of that increase has occurred since the first CO2 measurements were made on Mauna Loa Volcano , Hawaii , in 1958 .
By measuring the composition of air bubbles trapped in glacial ice , scientists can learn the amount of atmospheric CO2 at times in the past .
Of particular interest is the time just before the Industrial Revolution , when society began to use fossil fuels .
By 1958 , when scientists began to directly measure CO2 content from the atmosphere at Mauna Loa volcano in the Pacific Ocean , the amount was 316 ppm -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
In 2014 , the atmospheric CO2 content had risen to around 400 ppm .
The amount of CO2 in the atmosphere has been measured at Mauna Loa Obser - vatory since 1958 .
The blue line shows yearly averaged CO2 .
The red line shows seasonal variations in CO2 .
Humans have changed the natural balance of the carbon cycle because we use coal , oil , and natural gas to supply our energy demands .
Fossil fuels are a sink for CO2 when they form , but they are a source for CO2 when they are burned .
This forest in Mexico has been cut down and burned to clear forested land for agri - culture .
The equation for combustion of propane , which is a simple hydrocarbon looks like this : The equation shows that when propane burns , it uses oxygen and produces carbon dioxide and water .
So when a car burns a tank of gas , the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere increases just a little .
Added over millions of tanks of gas and coal burned for electricity in power plants and all of the other sources of CO2 , the result is the increase in atmospheric CO2 seen in the Figure 1.2 .
Trees naturally absorb CO2 while they are alive .
Trees that are cut down lose their ability to absorb CO2 .
If the tree is burned or decomposes , it becomes a source of CO2 .
A forest can go from being a carbon sink to being a carbon source .
Greenhouse gases trap heat energy that would otherwise radiate out into space , which warms Earth .
These gases were discussed in the chapter Atmospheric Processes .
Most air pollutants come from burning fossil fuels or plant material .
Nearly half -LRB- 49 % -RRB- of air pollution comes from transportation , 28 % from factories and power plants , and the remaining pollution from a variety of other sources .
Fossil fuels are burned in most motor vehicles and power plants .
SO2 mixes with H2 O in the air to produce sulfuric acid -LRB- H2 SO4 -RRB- .
Mercury is released when coal and some types of wastes are burned .
Mercury is emitted as a gas , but as it cools , it becomes a droplet .
Mercury droplets eventually fall to the ground .
Pure coal and petroleum can burn cleanly and emit only carbon dioxide and water , but most of the time these fossil fuels do not burn completely and the incomplete chemical reactions produce pollutants .
Few sources of these fossil fuels are pure , so other pollutants are usually released .
These pollutants include carbon monoxide , nitrogen dioxide , sulfur dioxide , and hydrocarbons .
Ozone , carbon monoxide , and nitrous oxides come from vehicle exhaust .
Auto exhaust like this means that the fuels is not burning efficiently .
A few pollutants come primarily from power plants or industrial plants that burn coal or oil .
Sulfur dioxide -LRB- SO2 -RRB- is a major component of industrial air pollution that is released whenever coal and petroleum are burned .
Fossil fuels are ancient plants and animals that have been converted into usable hydrocarbons .
Burning plant and animal material directly also produces pollutants .
About 40 % of the particulates that enter the atmosphere above the United States are from industry and about 17 % are from vehicles .
Particulates also occur naturally from volcanic eruptions or windblown dust .
Like other pollutants , they travel all around the world on atmospheric currents .
Biomass is the total amount of living material found in an environment .
The biomass of a rainforest is the amount of living material found in that rainforest .
The primary way biomass is burned is for slash-and-burn agriculture -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The rainforest is slashed down and then the waste is burned to clear the land for farming .
Biomass from other biomes , such as the savannah , is also burned to clear farmland .
Burning forests increases greenhouse gases in the atmosphere by releasing the CO2 stored in the biomass and also by removing the forest so that it can not store CO2 in the future .
As with all forms of air pollution , the smoke from biomass burning often spreads far and pollutants can plague neighboring states or countries .
No one knows how or when life first began on the turbulent early Earth .
Scientists think that it is extremely likely that life began and was wiped out more than once ; for example , by the impact that created the Moon .
This issue of whats living and whats not becomes important when talking about the origin of life .
If were going to know when a blob of organic material crossed over into being alive , we need to have a definition of life .
To be considered alive a molecule must : be organic .
To look for information regarding the origin of life , scientists : perform experiments to recreate the environmental conditions found at that time .
study the living creatures that make their homes in the types of extreme environments that were typical in Earths early days .
seek traces of life left by ancient microorganisms , also called microbes , such as microscopic features or isotopic ratios indicative of life .
Amino acids are the building blocks of life because they create proteins .
To form proteins , the amino acids are linked together by covalent bonds to form polymers called polypeptide chains -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
These chains are arranged in a specific order to form each different type of protein .
An important question facing scientists is where the first amino acids came from : did they originate on Earth or did they fly in from outer space ?
No matter where they originated , the creation of amino acids requires the right starting materials and some energy .
To see if amino acids could originate in the environment thought to be present in the first years of Earths existence , Stanley Miller and Harold Urey performed a famous experiment in 1953 .
To simulate the early atmosphere they Amino acids form polypeptide chains .
placed hydrogen , methane , and ammonia in a flask of heated water that created water vapor , which they called the primordial soup .
Sparks simulated lightning , which the scientists thought could have been the energy that drove the chemical reactions that created the amino acids .
The gases combined to form water-soluble organic compounds including amino acids .
Amino acids might also have originated at hydrothermal vents or deep in the crust where Earths internal heat is the energy source .
Meteorites containing amino acids currently enter the Earth system and so meteorites could have delivered amino acids to the planet from elsewhere in the solar system -LRB- where they would have formed by processes similar to those outlined here -RRB- .
Ions come together to create a molecule so that electrical charges are balanced ; the positive charges balance the negative charges and the molecule has no electrical charge .
To balance electrical charge , an atom may share its electron with another atom , give it away , or receive an electron from another atom .
Lithium -LRB- left -RRB- and fluorine -LRB- right -RRB- form an ionic compound called lithium fluoride .
In fact , your body is held together by electrons shared by carbons and hydrogens !
Covalent bonds are also very strong , meaning it takes a lot of energy to break them apart .
Hydrogen bond : These weak , intermolecular bonds are formed when the positive side of one polar molecule is attracted to the negative side of another polar molecule .
In fact , this property is why water is so good at dissolving things .
The joining of ions to make molecules is called chemical bonding .
The positive side of the molecule is attracted to Methane is formed when four hydrogens and one carbon covalently bond .
negative ions and the negative side is attracted to positive ions .
There are three main types of chemical bonds that are important in our discussion of minerals and rocks : Ionic bond : Electrons are transferred between atoms .
An ion will give one or more electrons to another ion .
In the Figure 1.2 , an atom of lithium donates an electron to an atom of fluorine to form an ionic compound .
The transfer of the electron gives the lithium ion a net charge of +1 , and the fluorine ion a net charge of -1 .
To clean groundwater , the water , as well as the rock and soil through which it travels , must be cleansed .
Thoroughly cleaning an aquifer would require cleansing each pore within the soil or rock unit .
For this reason , cleaning polluted groundwater is very costly , takes years , and is sometimes not technically feasible .
If the toxic materials can be removed from the aquifer , disposing of them is another challenge .
If the source is an underground tank , the tank will be pumped dry and then dug out from the ground .
If the source is a factory that is releasing toxic chemicals that are ending up in the groundwater , the factory may be required to stop the discharge .
Hydrologists must determine how far , in what direction , and how rapidly the plume is moving .
The scientists will use existing wells and may drill test wells to check for concentrations and monitor the movement of the plume .
Using the well data , the hydrologist uses a computer program with information on the permeability of the aquifer and the direction and rate of groundwater flow , then models the plume to predict the dispersal of the contaminant through the aquifer .
First , an underground barrier is constructed to isolate the contaminated groundwater from the rest of the aquifer .
Next , the contaminated groundwater may be treated in place .
Bioengineered microorganisms are injected into the contaminant plume and allowed to consume the pollutant .
Air may be pumped into the polluted region to encourage the growth and reproduction of the microbes .
With chemical remediation , a chemical is pumped into the aquifer so the contaminant is destroyed .
Acids or bases can neutralize contaminants or cause pollutants to precipitate from the water .
The most difficult and expensive option is for reclamation teams to pump the water to the surface , cleanse it using chemical or biological methods , then re-inject it into the aquifer .
The contaminated portions of the aquifer must be dug up and the pollutant destroyed by incinerating or chemically processing the soil , which is then returned to the ground .
Much of the time Earths climate was hotter and more humid than it is today , but climate has also been colder , as when glaciers covered much more of the planet .
Since the end of the Pleistocene , the global average temperature has risen about 4o C -LRB- 7o F -RRB- .
While climate is getting steadily warmer , there have been a few more extreme warm and cool times in the last 10,000 years .
The Medieval Warm Period from 900 to 1300 A.D. allowed Vikings to colonize Greenland and Great Britain to grow wine grapes .
The Little Ice Age , from the 14th to 19th centuries , the Vikings were forced out of Greenland and humans had to plant crops further south .
This illustrates the high tem - peratures of the Medieval Warm Period , the lows of the Little Ice Age , and the very high -LRB- and climbing -RRB- temperature of this decade .
Glaciers advanced and retreated in cycles , known as glacial and interglacial periods .
With so much of the worlds water bound into the ice , sea level was about 125 meters -LRB- 395 feet -RRB- lower than it is today .
Many scientists think that we are now in a warm , interglacial period that has lasted about 10,000 years .
For the past 1500 years , climate has been relatively mild and stable when compared with much of Earths history .
Stability has allowed the expansion of agriculture and the development of towns and cities .
The major factors that influence climate determine the different climate zones .
In general , the same type of climate zone will be found at similar latitudes and in similar positions on nearly all continents , both in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres .
The exceptions to this pattern are the climate zones called the continental climates , which are not found at higher latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere .
This is because the Southern Hemisphere land masses are not wide enough to produce a continental climate .
This system is based on the temperature , the amount of precipitation , and the times of year when precipitation occurs .
Since climate determines the type of vegetation that grows in an area , vegetation is used as an indicator of climate type .
A climate type and its plants and animals make up a biome .
The organisms have adapted to that environment in similar ways over time .
For example , different species of cactus live on different continents , but they have adapted to the harsh desert in similar ways .
The Kppen classification system recognizes five major climate groups .
Each group is divided into subcategories .
Some of these subcategories are forest , monsoon , and wet/dry types , based on the amount of precipitation and season when that precipitation occurs -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
This world map of the Kppen classification system indicates where the climate zones and major biomes are located .
Tropical moist climates are found in a band about 15o to 25o N and S of the Equator -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Rainfall : Irregular ; several years of drought are often followed by a single year of abundant rainfall .
Low latitude deserts are found at the Ferrell cell high pressure zone .
Higher latitude deserts occur within continents or in rainshadows .
Vegetation is sparse but well adapted to the dry conditions .
Moist subtropical mid-latitude climates are found along the coastal areas in the United States .
Continental climates are found in most of the North American interior from about 40 N to 70 N. Temperature : The average temperature of the warmest month is higher than 10 C -LRB- 50 F -RRB- and the coldest month is below -3 C -LRB- 27 F -RRB- .
Trees grow in continental climates , even though winters are extremely cold , because the average annual temperature is fairly mild .
Continental climates are not found in the Southern Hemisphere because of the absence of a continent large enough to generate this effect .
Polar climates are found across the continents that border the Arctic Ocean , Greenland , and Antarctica .
Precipitation : The region is dry , with less than 25 cm -LRB- 10 inches -RRB- of precipitation annually ; most precipitation occurs during the summer .
When climate conditions in a small area are different from those of the surroundings , the climate of the small area is called a microclimate .
The ground surface may be hotter or colder than the air a few feet above it , because rock and soil gain and lose heat readily .
In the Northern Hemisphere , a south-facing slope receives more solar energy than a north-facing slope , so each side supports different amounts and types of vegetation .
Climates and biomes typical of higher latitudes may be found in other areas of the world at high altitudes .
Coal , a solid fossil fuel formed from the partially decomposed remains of ancient forests , is burned primarily to produce electricity .
Coal use is undergoing enormous growth as the availability of oil and natural gas decreases and cost increases .
The most common form of coal is bituminous , a sedimentary rock that contains impurities such as sulfur -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Coal forms from dead plants that settled at the bottom of ancient swamps .
Lush coal swamps were common in the tropics during the Carboniferous period , which took place more than 300 million years ago -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Mud and other dead plants buried the organic material in the swamp , and burial kept oxygen away .
When plants are buried without oxygen , the organic material can be preserved or fossilized .
Sand and clay settling on top of the decaying plants squeezed out the water and other substances .
Millions of years later , what remains is a carbon - containing rock that we know as coal .
California once had a number of small coal mines , but the state no longer produces coal .
To turn coal into electricity , the rock is crushed into powder , which is then burned in a furnace that has a boiler .
Like other fuels , coal releases its energy as heat when it burns .
Heat from the burning coal boils the water in the boiler to make steam .
The steam spins turbines , which turn generators to create electricity .
In this way , the energy stored in the coal is converted to useful energy like electricity .
For coal to be used as an energy source , it must first be mined .
Coal mining occurs at the surface or underground by methods that are described in the the chapter Materials of Earths Crust -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
In April 2010 , 29 miners were killed at a West Virginia coal mine when gas that had accumulated in the mine tunnels exploded and started a fire .
Coal mining exposes minerals and rocks from underground to air and water at the surface .
Many of these minerals contain the element sulfur , which mixes with air and water to make sulfuric acid , a highly corrosive chemical .
If the sulfuric acid gets into streams , it can kill fish , plants , and animals that live in or near the water .
Most ocean pollution comes as runoff from land and originates as agricultural , industrial , and municipal wastes -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The remaining 20 % of water pollution enters the ocean directly from oil spills and people dumping wastes directly into the water .
More than one-third of the shellfish-growing waters of the United States are adversely affected by coastal pollution .
After rainfall , there can be enough runoff pollution that beaches must be closed to prevent the spread of disease from pollutants .
A surprising number of beaches are closed because of possible health hazards each year .
A large proportion of the fish we rely on for food live in the coastal wetlands or lay their eggs there .
Coastal runoff from farm waste often carries water-borne organisms that cause lesions that kill fish .
Humans who come in In some areas of the world , ocean pollution is all too obvious .
contact with polluted waters and affected fish can also experience harmful symptoms .
Fertilizers that run off of lawns and farm fields are extremely harmful to the environment .
Nutrients , such as nitrates , in the fertilizer promote algae growth in the water they flow into .
With the excess nutrients , lakes , rivers , and bays become clogged with algae and aquatic plants .
Eventually these organisms die and decompose .
Decomposition uses up all the dissolved oxygen in the water .
Without oxygen , large numbers of plants , fish , and bottom-dwelling animals die .
Every year dead zones appear in lakes and nearshore waters .
The Mississippi is not the only river that carries the nutrients necessary to cause a dead zone .
Rivers that drain regions where human population density is high and where crops are grown create dead zones all over the world -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Their orbits carry them from the outer solar system to the inner solar system , close to the Sun .
Halleys comet , with a period of 75 years , will next be seen in 2061 .
The first mention of the comet in historical records may go back as much as two millennia .
Early in Earths history , comets may have brought water and other substances to Earth during collisions .
Comet tails form the outer layers of ice melt and evaporate as the comet flies close to the Sun .
The ice from the comet vaporizes and forms a glowing coma , which reflects light from the Sun .
Radiation and particles streaming from the Sun push this gas and dust into a long tail that always points away from the Sun -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Comets appear for only a short time when they are near the Sun , then seem to disappear again as they move back to the outer solar system .
Comet Hale-Bopp , also called the Great Comet of 1997 , shone brightly for several months in 1997 .
The comet has two visible tails : a bright , curved dust tail and a fainter , straight tail of ions -LRB- charged atoms -RRB- pointing directly away from the Sun .
The time between one appearance of a comet and the next is called the comets period .
Short-period comets , with periods of about 200 years or less , come from a region beyond the orbit of Neptune called the Kuiper belt -LRB- pronounced KI-per -RRB- .
Comets with periods as long as thousands or even millions of years come from a very distant region of the solar system called the Oort cloud , about 50,000 100,000 AU from the Sun -LRB- 50,000 - 100,000 times the distance from the Sun to Earth -RRB- .
Water consumption per person has been going down for the past few decades .
There are many ways that water conservation can be encouraged .
Water use may be restricted by time of day , season , or activity .
Good behavior can be encouraged ; for example , people can be given an incentive to replace grass with desert plants in arid regions .
As human population growth continues , water conservation will become increasingly important globally , especially in developed countries where people use an enormous amount of water .
What are some of the ways you can conserve water in and around your home ?
Goals like these are made more difficult as population continues to grow .
This colorful adobe house in Tucson , Arizona is surrounded by native cactus , which needs little water to thrive .
Avoid polluting water so that less is needed .
Convert to more efficient irrigation methods on farms and in gardens .
Reduce household demand by installing water-saving devices such as low-flow shower heads and toilets .
Reduce personal demand by turning off the tap when water is not being used and taking shorter showers .
At Earth Summit 2002 , many governments approved a Plan of Action to address the scarcity of water and safe drinking water in developing countries .
One goal of this plan was to cut in half the number of people without access to safe drinking water by 2015 .
Alfred Wegener , born in 1880 , was a meteorologist and explorer .
In 1911 , Wegener found a scientific paper that listed identical plant and animal fossils on opposite sides of the Atlantic Ocean .
The explanation put out by the scientists of the day was that land bridges had once stretched between these continents .
Instead , Wegener pondered the way Africa and South America appeared to fit together like puzzle pieces .
Other scientists had suggested that Africa and South America had once been joined , but Wegener was the ideas most dogged supporter .
Wegener amassed a tremendous amount of evidence to support his hypothesis that the continents had once been joined .
What sort of evidence would you look for to see if the continents had actually been joined and had moved apart ?
Here is the main evidence that Wegener and his supporters collected for the continental drift hypothesis : The continents appear to fit together .
Ancient fossils of the same species of extinct plants and animals are found in rocks of the same age but are on continents that are now widely separated -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Wegener said the rocks had formed side by side and that the land had since moved apart .
Wegener concluded that they formed as a single mountain range that was separated as the continents drifted .
Grooves and rock deposits left by ancient glaciers are found today on different continents very close to the Equator .
This would indicate that the glaciers either formed in the middle of the ocean and/or covered most of the Earth .
Today , glaciers only form on land and nearer the poles .
Wegener thought that the glaciers were centered over the southern land mass close to the South Pole and the continents moved to their present positions later on .
Coral reefs and coal-forming swamps are found in tropical and subtropical environments , but ancient coal seams and coral reefs are found in locations where it is much too cold today .
Wegener proposed that the organisms had lived side by side , but that the lands had moved apart after they were dead and fossilized .
Wegener suggested that these creatures were alive in warm climate zones and that the fossils and coal later drifted to new locations on the continents .
Wegener thought that mountains formed as continents ran into each other .
This got around the problem of the leading hypothesis of the day , which was that Earth had been a molten ball that bulked up in spots as it cooled -LRB- the problem with this idea was that the mountains should all be the same age and they were known not to be -RRB- .
His critics suggested that the organisms moved over long-gone land bridges , but Wegener thought that the organisms could not have been able to travel across the oceans .
Fossils of the seed fern Glossopteris were too heavy to be carried so far by wind .
Mesosaurus was a swimming reptile , but could only swim in fresh water .
Wegener used fossil evidence to support his continental drift hypothesis .
The fos - sils of these organisms are found on lands that are now far apart .
Identical rocks , of the same type and age , are found on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean .
The Coriolis effect describes how Earths rotation steers winds and surface ocean currents -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Coriolis causes freely moving objects to appear to move to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere .
As wind or an ocean current moves , the Earth spins underneath it .
As a result , an object moving north or south along the Earth will appear to move in a curve instead of in a straight line .
Wind or water that travels toward the poles from the Equator is deflected to the east , while wind or water that travels toward the Equator from the poles gets bent to the west .
The Coriolis effect bends the direction of surface currents to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and left in the Southern Hemisphere .
The Coriolis effect causes winds and cur - rents to form circular patterns .
The di - rection that they spin depends on the hemisphere that they are in .
Coriolis effect is demonstrated using a metal ball and a rotating plate in this video .
The ball moves in a circular path just like a freely moving particle of gas or liquid moves on the rotating Earth -LRB- 5b -RRB- .
The objects themselves are actually moving straight , but the Earth is rotating beneath them , so they seem to bend or curve .
Thats why it is incorrect to call Coriolis a force .
An example might make the Coriolis effect easier to visualize .
If an airplane flies 500 miles due north , it will not arrive at the city that was due north of it when it began its journey .
Over the time it takes for the airplane to fly 500 miles , that city moved , along with the Earth it sits on .
The airplane will therefore arrive at a city to the west of the original city -LRB- in the Northern Hemisphere -RRB- , unless the pilot has compensated for the change .
So to reach his intended destination , the pilot must also veer right while flying north .
Superposition and cross-cutting are helpful when rocks are touching one another and lateral continuity helps match up rock layers that are nearby .
How do geologists correlate rock layers that are separated by greater distances ?
The famous White Cliffs of Dover in southwest England can be matched to similar white cliffs in Denmark and Germany .
To become an index fossil the organism must have -LRB- 1 -RRB- been widespread so that it is useful for identifying rock layers over large areas and -LRB- 2 -RRB- existed for a relatively brief period of time so that the approximate age of the rock layer is immediately known .
Many fossils may qualify as index fossils -LRB- Figure below -RRB- .
Ammonites , trilobites , and graptolites are often used as index fossils .
Fossils of animals that drifted in the upper layers of the ocean are particularly useful as index fossils , since they may be distributed over very large areas .
A biostratigraphic unit , or biozone , is a geological rock layer that is defined by a single index fossil or a fossil assemblage .
A biozone can also be used to identify rock layers across distances .
A key bed can be used like an index fossil since a key bed is a distinctive layer of rock that can be recognized across a large area .
One famous key bed is the clay layer at the boundary between the Cretaceous Period and the Tertiary Period , the time that the dinosaurs went extinct -LRB- Figure in asteroids .
In 1980 , the father-son team of Luis and Walter Alvarez proposed that a huge asteroid struck Earth 66 million years ago and caused the mass extinction .
Thermo means heat and haline refers to salinity .
Dif - ferences in temperature and in salinity change the density of seawater .
When a volume of water is cooled , the molecules move less vigorously , so same number of molecules takes up less space and the water is denser .
If salt is added to a volume of water , there are more molecules in the same volume , so the water is denser .
Water becomes dense near the poles .
This deep water mixes with less dense water as it flows .
Surface currents move water into the space vacated at the surface where the dense water sank -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Water also sinks into the deep ocean off of Antarctica .
Cold water -LRB- blue lines -RRB- sinks in the North Atlantic , flows along the bottom of the ocean and upwells in the Pacific or Indian .
The water then travels in surface currents -LRB- red lines -RRB- back to the North Atlantic .
Deep water also forms off of Antarctica .
Cold polar air cools the water and lowers its temperature , increasing its salinity .
Fresh water freezes out of seawater to become sea ice , which also increases the salinity of the remaining water .
This sinking is called downwelling .
This video lecture discusses the vertical distribution of life in the oceans .
Seawater density creates currents , which provide different habitats for different creatures : Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The dense water pushes deeper water out of its way and that water moves along the bottom of the ocean .
Since unlimited amounts of water can not sink to the bottom of the ocean , water must rise from the deep ocean to the surface somewhere .
This process is called upwelling -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Winds blow the surface water north and south of the Equator , so deep water undergoes upwelling .
The nutrients rise to the surface and support a great deal of life in the equatorial oceans .
Upwelling forces denser water from below to take the place of less dense water at the surface that is pushed away by the wind .
Generally , upwelling occurs along the coast when wind blows water strongly away from the shore .
This leaves a void that is filled by deep water that rises to the surface .
During its time on the bottom , the cold deep water has collected nutrients that have fallen down through the water column .
Upwelling brings those nutrients to the surface .
Those nutrients support the growth of plankton and form the base of a rich ecosystem .
In the process of relative dating , scientists do not determine the exact age of a fossil or rock but look at a sequence of rocks to try to decipher the times that an event occurred relative to the other events represented in that sequence .
After layers A-B-C were present , intrusion D cut across all three .
Fault E formed , shifting rocks A through C and intrusion D. 6 .
Weathering and erosion created a layer of soil on top of layer A. Click image to the left or use the URL below .
In some cases , it is very tricky to determine the sequence of events that leads to a certain formation .
Before we develop some hypotheses , lets find a new question that we want to answer .
What we just learned that atmospheric CO2 has been increasing at least since 1958 .
We discover two things : Carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere by volcanoes when they erupt .
Carbon dioxide is released when fossil fuels are burned .
A hypothesis is a reasonable explanation to explain a small range of phenomena .
A hypothesis is limited in scope , explaining a single event or a fact .
From these two facts we can create two hypotheses .
Atmospheric CO2 has increased over the past five decades , because the amount of CO2 gas released by volcanoes has increased .
Usually , testing a hypothesis requires making observations or performing experiments .
In this case , we will look into the scientific literature to see if we can support or refute either or both of these hypotheses .
Distances to stars that are relatively close to us can be measured using parallax .
Parallax is an apparent shift in position that takes place when the position of the observer changes .
Now where will the astronomer go to make an observation the greatest possible distance from the first observation ?
In six months , after Earth moves from one side of its orbit around the Sun to the other side , the astronomer looks at the star again .
This time parallax causes the star to appear in a different position relative to more distant stars .
From the size of this shift , astronomers can calculate the distance to the star .
To see an example of parallax , try holding your finger about 1 foot -LRB- 30 cm -RRB- in front of your eyes .
Now , while focusing on your finger , close one eye and then the other .
Alternate back and forth between eyes , and pay attention to how your finger appears to move .
Now try moving your finger closer to your eyes , and repeat the experiment .
As Figure 1.1 shows , astronomers use this same principle to measure the distance to stars .
Even with the most precise instruments available , parallax is too small to measure the distance to stars that are more than a few hundred light years away .
For these more distant stars , astronomers must use more indirect methods of determining distance .
Most of these methods involve determining how bright the star they are looking at really is .
The astronomer compares the observed brightness to the expected brightness .
Earths oceans contain 97 % of the planets water .
Most fresh water is trapped as ice in the vast glaciers and ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica .
How is the 3 % of fresh water divided into different reservoirs ?
A storage location for water such as an ocean , glacier , pond , or even the atmosphere is known as a reservoir .
A water molecule may pass through a reservoir very quickly or may remain for much longer .
The amount of time a molecule stays in a reservoir is known as its residence time .
In 2006 , the International Astronomical Union decided that there were too many questions surrounding what could be called a planet , and so refined the definition of a planet .
Be big enough that its own gravity causes it to be shaped as a sphere .
With the discovery of many new objects in our solar system , astronomers refined the definition of a dwarf planet in 2006 .
According to the IAU , a dwarf planet must : Orbit a star .
The reclassification of Pluto to the new category dwarf planet stirred up a great deal of controversy .
Plutos orbit is tilted relative to the other planets and is shaped like a long , narrow ellipse .
Plutos orbit sometimes even passes inside Neptunes orbit .
From the time it was discovered in 1930 until the early 2000s , Pluto was considered the ninth planet .
Pluto and the other dwarf planets , besides Ceres , are found orbiting out beyond Neptune .
When astronomers first located Pluto , the telescopes were not as good , so Pluto and its moon , Charon , were seen as one much larger object -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
With better telescopes , astronomers realized that Pluto was much smaller than they had thought .
Better technology also allowed astronomers to discover many smaller objects like Pluto that orbit the Sun .
One of them , Eris , discovered in 2005 , is even larger than Pluto .
Even when it was considered a planet , Pluto was an oddball .
Ceres is by far the closest dwarf planet to the Sun ; it resides between Mars and Jupiter .
Before 2006 , Ceres was considered the largest of the asteroids , with only about 1.3 % of the mass of the Earths Moon .
But unlike the asteroids , Ceres has enough mass that its gravity causes it to be shaped like a sphere .
Ceres orbits the Sun , is round , and is not a moon .
As part of the asteroid belt , its orbit is full of other smaller bodies , so Ceres fails the fourth criterion for being a planet .
With a diameter estimated to be between 1,300 and 1,900 km , it is about three-quarters the size of Pluto .
Makemake orbits the Sun in 310 years at a distance between 38.5 to 53 AU .
Makemake is named after the deity that created humanity in the mythology of the people of Easter Island .
The object was not discovered until 2003 because it is about three times farther from the Sun than Pluto , and almost 100 times farther from the Sun than Earth is .
For a short time Eris was considered the tenth planet in the solar system , but its discovery helped to prompt astronomers to better define planets and dwarf planets in 2006 .
Eris also has a small moon , Dysnomia , that orbits it once about every 16 days .
Astronomers know there may be other dwarf planets in the outer reaches of the solar system .
Haumea was made a dwarf planet in 2008 , so the total number of dwarf planets is now five .
Quaoar , Varuna , and Orcus may be added to the list of dwarf planets in the future .
Earths first atmosphere was made of hydrogen and helium , the gases that were common in this region of the solar system as it was forming .
Most of these gases were drawn into the center of the solar nebula to form the Sun .
When Earth was new and very small , the solar wind blew off atmospheric gases that collected .
If gases did collect , they were vaporized by impacts , especially from the impact that brought about the formation of the Moon .
Eventually things started to settle down and gases began to collect .
High heat in Earths early days meant that there were constant volcanic eruptions , which released gases from the mantle into the atmosphere -LRB- see opening image -RRB- .
Scientists have calculated that the amount of gas that collected to form the early atmosphere could not have come entirely from volcanic eruptions .
Frequent impacts by asteroids and comets brought in gases and ices , including water , carbon dioxide , methane , ammonia , nitrogen , and other volatiles from elsewhere in the solar system -LRB- Figure Calculations also show that asteroids and comets can not be responsible for all of the gases of the early atmosphere , so both impacts and outgassing were needed .
The second atmosphere , which was the first to stay with the planet , formed from volcanic outgassing and comet ices .
Animals need oxygen to breathe .
Plants produce oxygen when they photosynthesize but life had not yet begun or had not yet developed photosynthesis .
In the early atmosphere , oxygen only appeared when sunlight split water molecules into hydrogen and oxygen and the oxygen accumulated in the atmosphere .
Oxygen is needed to make ozone , a molecule made of three oxygen ions , O3 .
Ozone collects in the atmospheric ozone layer and blocks harmful ultraviolet radiation from the Sun .
When Earth was cool enough , water vapor condensed and rain began to fall .
Over millions of years enough precipitation collected that the first oceans could have formed as early as 4.2 to 4.4 billion years ago .
Dissolved minerals carried by stream runoff made the early oceans salty .
Marine sedimentary rocks can be dated back about 4 billion years .
By the Archean , the planet was covered with oceans and the atmosphere was full of water vapor , carbon dioxide , nitrogen , and smaller amounts of other gases .
When photosynthesis evolved and spread around the planet , oxygen was released in abundance .
The addition of oxygen is what created Earths third atmosphere .
This event , which occurred about 2.5 billion years ago , is sometimes called the oxygen catastrophe because so many organisms died .
Although entire species died out and went extinct , this event is also called the Great Oxygenation Event because it was a great opportunity .
The organisms that survived developed a use for oxygen through cellular respiration , the process by which cells can obtain energy from organic molecules .
This opened up many opportunities for organisms to evolve to fill different niches and many new types of organisms first appeared on Earth .
What evidence do scientists have that large quantities of oxygen entered the atmosphere ?
The iron contained in the rocks combined with the oxygen to form reddish iron oxides .
By the beginning of the Proterozoic , banded-iron formations -LRB- BIFs -RRB- were forming .
Banded-iron formations display alternating bands of iron oxide and iron-poor chert that probably represent a seasonal cycle of an aerobic and an anaerobic environment .
By 1.8 billion years ago , the amount of BIF declined .
In recent times , the iron in these formations has been mined , and that explains the location of the auto industry in the upper Midwest .
With more oxygen in the atmosphere , ultraviolet radiation could create ozone .
With the formation of an ozone layer to protect the surface of the Earth from UV radiation , more complex life forms could evolve .
Fossils are our best form of evidence about Earth history , including the history of life .
Along with other geological evidence from rocks and structures , fossils even give us clues about past climates , the motions of plates , and other major geological events .
Since the present is the key to the past , what we know about a type of organism that lives today can be applied to past environments .
That life on Earth has changed over time is well illustrated by the fossil record .
Fossils in relatively young rocks resemble animals and plants that are living today .
We would know very little about the organisms that came before us if there were no fossils .
Modern technology has allowed scientists to reconstruct images and learn about the biology of extinct animals like dinosaurs !
By knowing something about the type of organism the fossil was , geologists can determine whether the region was terrestrial -LRB- on land -RRB- or marine -LRB- underwater -RRB- or even if the water was shallow or deep .
The rock may give clues to whether the rate of sedimentation was slow or rapid .
The amount of wear and fragmentation of a fossil allows scientists to learn about what happened to the region after the organism died ; for example , whether it was exposed to wave action .
The presence of marine organisms in a rock indicates that the region where the rock was deposited was once marine .
Sometimes fossils of marine organisms are found on tall mountains indicating that rocks that formed on the seabed were uplifted .
By knowing something about the climate a type of organism lives in now , geologists can use fossils to decipher the climate at the time the fossil was deposited .
For example , coal beds form in tropical environments but ancient coal beds are found in Antarctica .
Geologists know that at that time the climate on the Antarctic continent was much warmer .
Recall from the chapter Plate Tectonics that Wegener used the presence of coal beds in Antarctica as one of the lines of evidence for continental drift .
An index fossil can be used to identify a specific period of time .
Organisms that make good index fossils are distinctive , widespread , and lived briefly .
Their presence in a rock layer can be used to identify rocks that were deposited at that period of time over a large area .
The fossil of a juvenile mammoth found near downtown San Jose California reveals an enormous amount about these majestic creatures : what they looked like , how they lived , and what the environment of the Bay Area was like so long ago .
At the planets center lies a dense metallic core .
Scientists know that the core is metal because : 1 .
Scientists know that the outer core is liquid and the inner core is solid because : 1 .
S-waves do not go through the outer core .
The strong magnetic field is caused by convection in the liquid outer core .
The heat that keeps the outer core from solidifying is produced by the breakdown of radioactive elements in the inner core .
The density of Earths surface layers is much less than the overall density of the planet , as calculated from the planets rotation .
Calculations indicate that the core is about 85 % iron metal with nickel metal making up much of the remaining 15 % .
The 85 % iron/15 % nickel calculation above is also seen in metallic meteorites -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Metals such as iron are magnetic , but rock , which makes up the mantle and crust , is not .
In 1666 , a young doctor named Nicholas Steno dissected the head of an enormous great white shark that had been caught by fisherman near Florence , Italy .
Steno was struck by the resemblance of the sharks teeth to fossils found in inland mountains and hills -LRB- Figure ?? -RRB- .
Most people at the time did not believe that fossils were once part of living creatures .
Authors in that day thought that the fossils of marine animals found in tall mountains , miles from any ocean could be explained in one of two ways : The shells were washed up during the Biblical flood .
-LRB- This explanation could not account for the fact that fossils were not only found on mountains , but also within mountains , in rocks that had been quarried from deep below Earths surface . -RRB-
The fossils formed within the rocks as a result of mysterious forces .
But for Steno , the close resemblance between fossils and modern organisms was impossible to ignore .
Instead of invoking supernatural forces , Steno concluded that fossils were once parts of living creatures .
Fossils include body fossils , left behind when the soft parts have decayed away , and trace fossils , such as burrows , tracks , or fossilized coprolites -LRB- feces -RRB- as seen above .
Collections of fossils are known as fossil assemblages .
When clams , oysters , and other shellfish die , the soft parts quickly decay , and the shells are scattered .
The shells are also attacked by worms , sponges , and other animals -LRB- Figure ?? -RRB- .
How about a soft bodied organism ?
Will a creature without hard shells or bones become a fossil ?
There is virtually no fossil record of soft bodied organisms such as jellyfish , worms , or slugs .
Insects , which are by far the most common land animals , are only rarely found as fossils -LRB- Figure ??
Why do you think only a tiny percentage of living organisms become fossils after death ?
Think about an antelope that dies on the African plain -LRB- Figure ?? -RRB- .
Most of its body is eaten by hyenas and other scavengers and the remaining flesh is devoured by insects and bacteria .
As the years go by , the bones are scattered and fragmented into small pieces , eventually turning into dust .
The remaining nutrients return to the soil .
This antelope will not be preserved as a fossil .
Is it more likely that a marine organism will become a fossil ?
How does an organism become fossilized ?
The fossil record consists almost entirely of the shells , bones , or other hard parts of animals .
Mammal teeth are much more resistant than other bones , so a large portion of the mammal fossil record consists of teeth .
Quick burial is essential because most decay and fragmentation occurs at the surface .
Marine animals that die near a river delta may be rapidly buried by river sediments .
A storm at sea may shift sediment on the ocean floor , covering a body and helping to preserve its skeletal remains -LRB- Figure ?? -RRB- .
Land organisms can be buried by mudslides , volcanic ash , or covered by sand in a sandstorm -LRB- Figure ?? -RRB- .
Skeletons can be covered by mud in lakes , swamps , or bogs .
Unusual circumstances may lead to the preservation of a variety of fossils , as at the La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles , California .
Although the animals trapped in the La Brea Tar Pits probably suffered a slow , miserable death , their bones were preserved perfectly by the sticky tar .
In spite of the difficulties of preservation , billions of fossils have been discovered , examined , and identified by thousands of scientists .
Some rock beds contain exceptional fossils or fossil assemblages .
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow .
Click image to the left for more content .
What factors have exposed sedimentary rock ?
What type of rocks are fossils found in ?
Earth is surrounded by a magnetic field -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- that behaves as if the planet had a gigantic bar magnet inside of it .
The magnetic field arises from the convection of molten iron and nickel metals in Earths liquid outer core .
Many times during Earth history , even relatively recent Earth history , the planets magnetic field has flipped .
That is , the north pole becomes the south pole and the south pole becomes the north pole .
One hypothesis is that the convection that drives the magnetic field becomes chaotic and then reverses itself .
Another hypothesis is that an external event , such as an asteroid impact , disrupts motions in the core and causes the reversal .
The first hypothesis is supported by computer models , but the second does not seem to be supported by much data .
URL : Earths magnetic field is like a bar magnet resides in the center of the planet .
Earth is a sphere or , more correctly , an oblate spheroid , which is a sphere that is a bit squished down at the poles and bulges a bit at the Equator .
There are many other ways that early scientists and mariners knew that Earth was not flat .
Larger satellites , those that have enough mass for their gravitational attraction to have made them round , are spherical as well .
The planet bulges around the equator due to mass collecting in the middle due to rotational momentum .
Try to design an experiment involving a ship and the ocean to show Earth is round .
If you are standing on the shore and a ship is going out to sea , the ship gets smaller as it moves further away from you .
The ships bottom also starts to disappear as the vessel goes around the arc of the planet -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
A solar eclipse occurs when the new Moon passes directly between the Earth and the Sun -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
This casts a shadow on the Earth and blocks Earths view of the Sun .
A solar eclipse shown as a series of pho - tos .
A total solar eclipse occurs when the Moons shadow completely blocks the Sun -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Solar eclipses are rare and usually only last a few minutes because the Moon casts only a small shadow -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
As the Sun is covered by the Moons shadow , it will actually get cooler outside .
Birds may begin to sing , and stars will become visible in the sky .
During a solar eclipse , the corona and solar prominences can be seen .
A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes between Earth and the Sun in such a way that the Sun is either partially or totally hidden from view .
Some people , including some scientists , chase eclipses all over the world to learn or just observe this amazing phenomenon .
A lunar eclipse occurs when the full moon moves through Earths shadow , which only happens when Earth is between the Moon and the Sun and all three are lined up in the same plane , called the ecliptic -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
In the penumbra , the light is dimmed but not totally absent .
A total lunar eclipse occurs when the Moon travels completely in Earths umbra .
Earths shadow is large enough that a lunar eclipse lasts for hours and can be seen by any part of Earth with a view of the Moon at the time of the eclipse -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
A lunar eclipse does not occur every month because Moons orbit is inclined 5-degrees to Earths orbit , so the two bodies are not in the same plane every month .
Many factors influence the climate of a region .
The most important factor is latitude because different latitudes receive different amounts of solar radiation .
The polar regions receive the least solar radiation .
The night lasts six months during the winter .
Even in summer , the Sun never rises very high in the sky .
The high albedo , because of ice and snow , reflects a good portion of the Suns light .
Its easy to see the difference in temperature at different latitudes in the Figure 1.1 .
But temperature is not completely correlated with latitude .
Human health suffers in locations with high levels of air pollution .
Carbon monoxide can kill people in poorly ventilated spaces , such as tunnels .
Nitrogen and sulfur-oxides cause lung disease and increased rates of asthma , emphysema , and viral infections such as the flu .
Ozone damages the human respiratory system , causing lung disease .
High ozone levels are also associated with increased heart disease and cancer .
Particulates enter the lungs and cause heart or lung disease .
By some estimates , 30,000 deaths a year in the United States are caused by fine particle pollution .
Many but not all cases of asthma can be linked to air pollution .
During the 1996 Olympic Games , Atlanta , Georgia , closed off their downtown to private vehicles .
One study found that in the United States , children develop asthma at more than twice the rate of two decades ago and at four times the rate of children in Canada .
Adults also suffer from air pollution-related illnesses that include lung disease , heart disease , lung cancer , and weakened immune systems .
The asthma rate worldwide is rising 20 % to 50 % every decade .
This action decreased ozone levels by 28 % .
Can scientists conclude without a shadow of a doubt that the reduction in ozone caused the reduction in hospital visits ?
Lung cancer among people who have never smoked is around 15 % and is increasing .
One study showed that the risk of being afflicted with lung cancer increases directly with a persons exposure to air pollution -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The study concluded that no level of air pollution should be considered safe .
Exposure to smog also increased the risk of dying from any cause , including heart disease .
Everyone can reduce their use of energy resources and the pollution the resources cause by conserving energy .
Conservation means saving resources by using them more efficiently , using less of them , or not using them at all .
Much of the energy used in the U.S. is used for transportation .
drive an energy-efficient vehicle when driving is the only way to get there .
The extra exercise is another benefit of using your own muscle power to get where you need to go .
Many people waste energy at home , so a lot of energy can be saved there as well .
turn the thermostat down in winter and up in summer .
Q : How can you tell which light bulbs and appliances use less energy ?
Biomass is the material that comes from plants and animals that were recently living .
Biomass can be burned directly , such as setting fire to wood .
Cow manure can have a second life as a source of methane gas , which can be converted to electricity .
Not only that food scraps can also be converted into green energy .
Food that is tossed out produces methane , a potent greenhouse gas .
But that methane from leftovers can be harnessed and used as fuel .
For as long as humans have had fire , people have used biomass for heating and cooking .
People can also process biomass to make fuel , called biofuel .
Biofuel can be created from crops , such as corn or Biofuels , such as ethanol , are added to gasoline to cut down the amount of fossil fuels that are used .
algae , and processed for use in a car -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The advantage to biofuels is that they burn more cleanly than fossil fuels .
Organic material , like almond shells , can be made into electricity .
Biomass power is a great use of wastes and is more reliable than other renewable energy sources , but harvesting biomass energy uses energy and biomass plants produce pollutants including greenhouse gases .
In many instances , the amount of energy , fertilizer , and land needed to produce the crops used make biofuels mean that they often produce very little more energy than they consume .
The fertilizers and pesticides used to grow the crops run off and become damaging pollutants in nearby water bodies or in the oceans .
To generate biomass energy , break down the cell walls of plants to release the sugars and then ferment those sugars to create fuel .
Growing algae requires much less land and energy than crops .
Algae can be grown in locations that are not used for other things , like in desert areas where other crops are not often grown .
Algae can be fed agricultural and other waste so valuable resources are not used .
Much research is being done to bring these alternative fuels to market .
Many groups are researching the use of algae for fuel .
Many people think that the best source of biomass energy for the future is algae .
Compared to corn , algae is not a food crop , it can grow in many places , its much easier to convert to a usable fuel , and its carbon neutral .
It shows that oil is the single most commonly used energy resource in the U.S. , followed by natural gas , and then by coal .
Nonrenewable resources are resources that are limited in supply and can not be replaced as quickly as they are used up .
Renewable resources , in contrast , provide only 8 percent of all energy used in the U.S. Renewable resources are natural resources that can be replaced in a relatively short period of time or are virtually limitless in supply .
The bar graph in the Figure 1.2 compares the amount of oil used by the top ten oil-using nations .
The U.S. uses more oil than several other top-ten countries combined .
The average person in the U.S. uses a whopping 23 barrels of oil a year !
In comparison , the average person in India or China uses just 1 or 2 barrels of oil a year .
Q : How does the use of oil and other fossil fuels relate to pollution ?
A : Greater use of oil and other fossil fuels causes more pollution .
Although mining provides people with many needed resources , the environmental costs can be high .
Surface mining clears the landscape of trees and soil , and nearby streams and lakes are inundated with sediment .
Pollutants from the mined rock , such as heavy metals , enter the sediment and water system .
Acids flow from some mine sites , changing the composition of nearby waterways -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
U.S. law has changed in recent decades so that a mine region must be restored to its natural state , a process called reclamation .
Pits may be allowed to fill with water and become lakes or may be turned into landfills .
Underground mines may be sealed off or left open as homes for bats .
Since the early 1990s , astronomers have discovered other solar systems , with planets orbiting stars other than our own Sun .
These are called `` extrasolar planets '' or simply exoplanets -LRB- see Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Exoplanets are not in our solar system , but are found in other solar systems .
Some extrasolar planets have been directly imaged , but most have been discovered by indirect methods .
One technique involves detecting the very slight motion of a star periodically moving toward and away from us along our line-of-sight -LRB- also known as a stars `` radial velocity '' -RRB- .
This periodic motion can be attributed to the gravitational pull of a planet or , sometimes , another star orbiting the star .
A planet may also be identified by measuring a stars brightness over time .
A temporary , periodic decrease in light emitted from a star can occur when a planet crosses in front of , or `` transits , '' the star it is orbiting , momentarily blocking out some of the starlight .
More than 1800 extrasolar planets have been identified and confirmed and the rate of discovery is increasing rapidly .
After discovering that there are galaxies beyond the Milky Way , Edwin Hubble went on to measure the distance to hundreds of other galaxies .
His data would eventually show how the universe is changing , and would even yield clues as to how the universe formed .
The spectrum will have specific dark bands where elements in the star absorb light of certain energies .
When astronomers see redshift in the light from a galaxy , they know that the galaxy is moving away from Earth .
If galaxies were moving randomly , would some be redshifted but others be blueshifted ?
Since almost every galaxy in the universe has a redshift , almost every galaxy is moving away from Earth .
By examining the arrangement of these dark absorption lines , astronomers can determine the composition of elements that make up a distant star .
In fact , the element helium was first discovered in our Sun not on Earth by analyzing the absorption lines in the spectrum of the Sun .
While studying the spectrum of light from distant galaxies , astronomers noticed something strange .
The dark lines in the spectrum were in the patterns they expected , but they were shifted toward the red end of the spectrum , as shown in Figure 1.1 .
This shift of absorption bands toward the red end of the spectrum is known as redshift .
Redshift occurs when the light source is moving away from the observer or when the space between the observer and the source is stretched .
Edwin Hubble combined his measurements of the distances to galaxies with other astronomers measurements of redshift .
From this data , he noticed a relationship , which is now called Hubbles Law : the farther away a galaxy is , the faster it is moving away from us .
But space itself is stretching out between galaxies , just as the rubber stretches when a balloon is inflated .
This stretching of space , which increases the distance between galaxies , is what causes the expansion of the universe .
On a balloon , the dots will become larger in size as you inflate it .
Figure 1.2 shows a simplified diagram of the expansion of the universe .
One way to picture this is to imagine a balloon covered with tiny dots to represent the galaxies .
When you inflate the balloon , the dots slowly move away from each other because the rubber stretches in the space between them .
In this diagram of the expansion of the universe over time , the distance between galaxies gets bigger over time , although the size of each galaxy stays the same .
If there is no movement on either side of a fracture , the fracture is called a joint .
These joints formed when the confining stress was removed from the rocks as shown in -LRB- Figure
If the blocks of rock on one or both sides of a fracture move , the fracture is called a fault -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Stresses along faults cause rocks to break and move suddenly .
The dip defines which of two basic types a fault is .
The energy released is an earthquake .
Try to line up the same type of rock on either side of the lines that cut across them .
One side moved relative to the other side , so you know the lines are a fault .
Slip is the distance rocks move along a fault .
Slip is relative , because there is usually no way to know whether both sides moved or only one .
Faults lie at an angle to the horizontal surface of the Earth .
In a normal fault , the hanging wall drops down relative to the footwall .
They are responsible for uplifting mountain ranges in regions experiencing tensional stress .
In a reverse fault , the footwall drops down relative to the hanging wall .
This diagram illustrates the two types of dip-slip faults : normal faults and reverse faults .
Imagine miners extracting a re - source along a fault .
The hanging wall is where miners would have hung their lanterns .
Rocks can slip many miles along thrust faults -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
If that block moves toward your right foot , the fault is a right-lateral strike-slip fault ; if that block moves toward your left foot , the fault is a left-lateral strike-slip fault -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
People sometimes say that California will fall into the ocean someday , which is not true .
Floods usually occur when precipitation falls more quickly than water can be absorbed into the ground or carried away by rivers or streams .
Waters may build up gradually over a period of weeks , when a long period of rainfall or snowmelt fills the ground with water and raises stream levels .
Extremely heavy rains across the Midwestern U.S. in April 2011 led to flooding of the rivers in the Mississippi River basin in May 2011 -LRB- Figures 1.1 and 1.2 -RRB- .
URL : This map shows the accumulated rainfall across the U.S. in the days from April 22 to April 29 , 2011 .
Record flow in the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers has to go somewhere .
Normal spring river levels are shown in 2010 .
The flooded region in the image from May 3 , 2011 is the New Madrid Floodway , where overflow water is meant to go .
2011 is the first time since 1927 that this floodway was used .
Flash floods are sudden and unexpected , taking place when very intense rains fall over a very brief period -LRB- Figure streambed .
A 2004 flash flood in England devastated two villages when 3-1/2 inches of rain fell in 60 minutes .
Pictured here is some of the damage from the flash flood .
Heavily vegetated lands are less likely to experience flooding .
Plants slow down water as it runs over the land , giving it time to enter the ground .
Even if the ground is too wet to absorb more water , plants still slow the waters passage and increase the time between rainfall and the waters arrival in a stream ; this could keep all the water falling over a region from hitting the stream at once .
Wetlands act as a buffer between land and high water levels and play a key role in minimizing the impacts of floods .
Flooding is often more severe in areas that have been recently logged .
People try to protect areas that might flood with dams , and dams are usually very effective .
But high water levels sometimes cause a dam to break and then flooding can be catastrophic .
People may also line a river bank with levees , high walls that keep the stream within its banks during floods .
A levee in one location may just force the high water up or downstream and cause flooding there .
The New Madrid Overflow in the Figure 1.2 was created with the recognition that the Mississippi River sometimes simply can not be contained by levees and must be allowed to flood .
Beyond this , infertile desert soils prevent viable farming .
Rivers deposit new nutrient-rich sediments when they flood , so floodplains have traditionally been good for farming .
Flooding as a source of nutrients was important to Egyptians along the Nile River until the Aswan Dam was built in the 1960s .
Although the dam protects crops and settlements from the annual floods , farmers must now use fertilizers to feed their cops .
Floods are also responsible for moving large amounts of sediments about within streams .
These sediments provide habitats for animals , and the periodic movement of sediment is crucial to the lives of several types of organisms .
Plants and fish along the Colorado River , for example , depend on seasonal flooding to rearrange sand bars .
Rocks deforming plastically under compressive stresses crumple into folds .
If the rocks experience more stress , they may undergo more folding or even fracture .
A monocline is a simple bend in the rock layers so that they are no longer horizontal -LRB- see Figure 1.1 for an example -RRB- .
What you see in the image appears to be a monocline .
Anticline : An anticline is a fold that arches upward .
The rocks dip away from the center of the fold -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The oldest rocks are at the center of an anticline and the youngest are draped over them .
When rocks arch upward to form a circular structure , that structure is called a dome .
If the top of the dome is sliced off , where are the oldest rocks located ?
A syncline is a fold that bends downward .
When rocks bend downward in a circular structure , that structure is called a basin -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
If the rocks are exposed at the surface , where are the oldest rocks located ?
URL : Anticlines are formations that have folded rocks upward .
Earth came together -LRB- accreted -RRB- from the cloud of dust and gas known as the solar nebula nearly 4.6 billion years ago , the same time the Sun and the rest of the solar system formed .
Gravity caused small bodies of rock and metal orbiting the proto-Sun to smash together to create larger bodies .
Over time , the planetoids got larger and larger until they became planets .
When Earth first came together it was really hot , hot enough to melt the metal elements that it contained .
Earth was so hot for three reasons : Gravitational contraction : As small bodies of rock and metal accreted , the planet grew larger and more massive .
Gravity within such an enormous body squeezes the material in its interior so hard that the pressure swells .
As Earths internal pressure grew , its temperature also rose .
These elements long ago decayed into stable materials , but they were responsible for the release of enormous amounts of heat in the beginning .
Bombardment : Ancient impact craters found on the Moon and inner planets indicate that asteroid impacts were common in the early solar system .
Earth was struck so much in its first 500 million years that the heat was intense .
Very few large objects have struck the planet in the past many hundreds of millions of year .
When Earth was entirely molten , gravity drew denser elements to the center and lighter elements rose to the surface .
The separation of Earth into layers based on density is known as differentiation .
The densest material moved to the center to create the planets dense metallic core .
Materials that are intermediate in density became part of the mantle -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Lighter materials accumulated at the surface of the mantle to become the earliest crust .
Intense heat from the early core drove rapid and vigorous mantle convection so that crust quickly recycled into the mantle .
The recycling of basaltic crust was so effective that no remnants of it are found today .
What there is comes from three sources : -LRB- 1 -RRB- zircon crystals , the oldest materials found on Earth , which show that the age of the earliest crust formed at least 4.4 billion years ago ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- meteorites that date from the beginning of the solar system , to nearly 4.6 billion years ago -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- ; and -LRB- 3 -RRB- lunar rocks , which represent the early days of the Earth-Moon system as far back as 4.5 billion years ago .
Unlike the only other natural satellites orbiting an inner planet , those of Mars , the Moon is not a captured asteroid .
Understanding the Moons birth and early history reveals a great deal about Earths early days .
To determine how the Moon formed , scientists had to account for several lines of evidence : The Moon is large ; not much smaller than the smallest planet , Mercury .
The oxygen isotope ratios of Earth and Moon indicate that they originated in the same part of the solar system .
Earth has a faster spin than it should have for a planet of its size and distance from the Sun .
Astronomers have carried out computer simulations that are consistent with these facts and have detailed a birth story for the Moon .
A little more than 4.5 billion years ago , roughly 70 million years after Earth formed , planetary bodies were being pummeled by asteroids and planetoids of all kinds .
Earth was struck by a Mars-sized asteroid -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
An artists depiction of the impact that produced the Moon .
The tremendous energy from the impact melted both bodies .
The dense metals remained on Earth but some of the molten , rocky material was flung into an orbit around Earth .
Since both planetary bodies were molten , material could differentiate out of the magma ocean into core , mantle , and crust as they cooled .
Earths fast spin is from energy imparted to it by the impact .
Lunar rocks reveal an enormous amount about Earths early days .
Why do you think Moon rocks contain information that is not available from Earths own materials ?
Can you find how all of the evidence presented in the bullet points above is present in the Moons birth story ?
The most widely accepted explanation of how the solar system formed is called the nebular hypothesis .
According to this hypothesis , the Sun and the planets of our solar system formed about 4.6 billion years ago from the collapse of a giant cloud of gas and dust , called a nebula .
The nebula was drawn together by gravity , which released gravitational potential energy .
As small particles of dust and gas smashed together to create larger ones , they released kinetic energy .
As the nebula collapsed , the gravity at the center increased and the cloud started to spin because of its angular momentum .
As it collapsed further , the spinning got faster , much as an ice skater spins faster when he pulls his arms to his sides during a spin .
Much of the clouds mass migrated to its center but the rest of the material flattened out in an enormous disk .
The disk contained hydrogen and helium , along with heavier elements and even simple organic molecules .
As gravity pulled matter into the center of the disk , the density and pressure at the center became intense .
When the pressure in the center of the disk was high enough , nuclear fusion began .
Eventually , the planetesimals formed protoplanets , which grew to become the planets and moons that we find in our solar system today .
Because of the gravitational sorting of material , the inner planets Mercury , Venus , Earth , and Mars formed from dense rock and metal .
Out by Jupiter and beyond , where its very cold , these materials form solid particles .
The nebular hypothesis was designed to explain some of the basic features of the solar system : The orbits of the planets lie in nearly the same plane with the Sun at the center The planets revolve in the same direction The planets mostly rotate in the same direction The axes of rotation of the planets are mostly nearly perpendicular to the orbital plane The oldest moon rocks are 4.5 billion years Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The burning star stopped the disk from collapsing further .
Meanwhile , the outer parts of the disk were cooling off .
Matter condensed from the cloud and small pieces of dust started clumping together .
Larger clumps , called An artists painting of a protoplanetary disk .
planetesimals , attracted smaller clumps with their gravity .
Gravity at the center of the disk attracted heavier particles , such as rock and metal and lighter particles remained further out in the disk .
The weight of this earth pressing down on these plant and animal remains created intense heat and pressure .
After millions of years of heat and pressure , the material in these layers turned into chemicals called hydrocarbons -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Hydrocarbons are made of carbon and hydrogen atoms .
The solar energy stored in fossil fuels is a rich source of energy .
Although fossil fuels provide very high quality energy , they are non-renewable .
Animal skeletons , teeth , shells , coprolites -LRB- otherwise known as feces -RRB- , or any other remains or traces from a living creature that becomes rock is a fossil .
The same processes that formed these fossils also created some of our most important energy resources , fossil fuels .
Fossil fuels come from living matter starting about 500 million years ago .
Millions of years ago , plants used energy from the Sun to form sugars , carbohydrates , and other energy-rich carbon compounds .
As plants and animals died , their remains settled on the ground on land and in swamps , lakes , and seas -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Over time , layer upon layer of these remains accumulated .
Eventually , the layers were buried so deeply that they were crushed by an enormous mass of earth .
Fossil fuels provide about 85 % of the worlds energy at this time .
Worldwide fossil fuel usage has increased many times over in the past half century -LRB- coal - 2.6 x , oil - 8x , natural gas - 14x -RRB- because of population increases , because of increases in the number of cars , televisions , and other fuel-consuming uses in the developed world , and because of lifestyle improvements in the developing world .
The amount of fossil fuels that remain untapped is unknown , but can likely be measured in decades for oil and natural gas and in a few centuries for coal -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
As the easy-to-reach fossil fuel sources are depleted , alternative sources of fossil fuels are increasingly being exploited -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
These include oil shale and tar sands .
Oil shale is rock that contains dispersed oil that has not collected in reservoirs .
To extract the oil from the shale requires enormous amounts of hot water .
Tar sands are rocky materials mixed with very thick oil .
Hot water and caustic soda are used to separate the oil from the rock .
The environmental consequences of mining these fuels , and of fossil fuel use in general , along with the fact that these fuels do not have a limitless supply , are prompting the development of alternative energy sources in some regions .
Organisms that live in lakes , ponds , streams , springs or wetlands are part of freshwater ecosystems .
These ecosys - tems vary by temperature , pressure -LRB- in lakes -RRB- , the amount of light that penetrates and the type of vegetation that lives there .
Limnology is the study of bodies of fresh water and the organisms that live there .
Most deep-water organisms are scavengers , such as crabs and catfish that feed on dead organisms that fall to the bottom of the lake .
Though different creatures live in the oceans , ocean waters also have these same divisions based on sunlight with similar types of creatures that live in each of the zones .
The ecosystem of a lake is divided into three distinct zones -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- : 1 .
The open-water zone -LRB- also called the photic or limnetic zone -RRB- has abundant sunlight .
The deep-water zone -LRB- also called the aphotic or profundal zone -RRB- has little or no sunlight .
There are several life zones found within a lake : In the littoral zone , sunlight promotes plant growth , which provides food and shelter to animals such as snails , insects , and fish .
In the open-water zone , other plants and fish , such as bass and trout , live .
Wetlands are rich and unique ecosystems with many species that rely on both the land and the water for survival .
Only specialized plants are able to grow in these conditions .
Wetlands tend have a great deal of biological diversity .
A swamp is a wetland with lush trees and vines found in low-lying areas beside slow-moving rivers -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Swamp plants and animals must be adapted for these low-oxygen conditions .
As mentioned above , wetlands are home to many different species of organisms .
Although they make up only 5 % of the area of the United States , wetlands contain more than 30 % of the plant types .
Many endangered species live in wetlands , so wetlands are protected from human use .
Wetlands also play a key biological role by removing pollutants from water .
For example , they can trap and use fertilizer that has washed off a farmers field , and therefore they prevent that fertilizer from contaminating another body of water .
Since wetlands naturally purify water , preserving wetlands also helps to maintain clean supplies of water .
Galaxies are the biggest groups of stars and can contain anywhere from a few million stars to many billions of stars .
To the naked eye , the closest major galaxy the Andromeda Galaxy , shown in Figure 1.1 looks like only a dim , fuzzy spot .
But that fuzzy spot contains one trillion 1,000,000,000,000 stars !
Galaxies are divided into three types according to shape : spiral galaxies , elliptical galaxies , and irregular galaxies .
Spiral galaxies spin , so they appear as a rotating disk of stars and dust , with a bulge in the middle , like the Sombrero Galaxy shown in Figure 1.2 .
Several arms spiral outward in the Pinwheel Galaxy -LRB- seen in Figure 1.2 -RRB- and are appropriately called spiral arms .
Because they contain lots of young stars , spiral arms tend to be blue .
Figure 1.3 shows a typical egg-shaped elliptical galaxy .
Giant elliptical galaxies , on the other hand , can contain over a trillion stars .
Elliptical galaxies are reddish to yellowish in color because they contain mostly old stars .
Most elliptical galaxies contain very little gas and dust because the gas and dust have already formed into stars .
However , some elliptical galaxies , such as the one shown in Figure 1.4 , contain lots of dust .
Why might some elliptical galaxies contain dust ?
Most irregular galaxies were once spiral or elliptical galaxies that were then deformed either by gravitational attraction to a larger galaxy or by a collision with another galaxy .
This galaxy , called NGC 1427A , has nei - ther a spiral nor an elliptical shape .
Dwarf galaxies are small galaxies containing only a few million to a few billion stars .
To be able to discuss Earth history , scientists needed some way to refer to the time periods in which events happened and organisms lived .
Then they divided Earths history into blocks of time with each block separated by important events , such as the disappearance of a species of fossil from the rock record .
Since many of the scientists who first assigned names to times in Earths history were from Europe , they named the blocks of time from towns or other local places where the rock layers that represented that time were found .
From these blocks of time the scientists created the geologic time scale -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Why do you think that the more recent time periods are divided more finely ?
We live in the Holocene -LRB- sometimes called Recent -RRB- epoch , Quaternary period , Cenozoic era , and Phanerozoic eon .
January 1 12 am : Earth forms from the planetary nebula - 4600 million years ago February 25 , 12:30 pm : The origin of life ; the first cells - 3900 million years ago March 4 , 3:39 pm : Oldest dated rocks - 3800 million years ago March 20 , 1:33 pm : First stromatolite fossils - 3600 million years ago July 17 , 9:54 pm : first fossil evidence of cells with nuclei - 2100 million years ago November 18 , 5:11 pm : Cambrian Explosion - 544 million years ago December 1 , 8:49 am : first insects - 385 million years ago December 2 , 3:54 am : first land animals , amphibians - 375 million years ago December 5 , 5:50 pm : first reptiles - 330 million years ago December 12 , 12:09 pm : Permo-Triassic Extinction - 245 million years ago December 13 , 8:37 pm : first dinosaurs - 228 million years ago December 14 , 9:59 am : first mammals 220 million years ago December 22 , 8:24 pm : first flowering plants - 115 million years ago December 26 , 7:52 pm : Cretaceous-Tertiary Extinction - 66 million years ago December 26 , 9:47 pm : first ancestors of dogs - 64 million years ago December 27 , 5:25 am : widespread grasses - 60 million years ago December 27 , 11:09 am : first ancestors of pigs and deer - 57 million years ago December 28 , 9:31 pm : first monkeys - 39 million years ago December 31 , 5:18 pm : oldest hominid - 4 million years ago December 31 , 11:02 pm : oldest direct human ancestor - 1 million years ago December 31 , 11:48 pm : first modern human - 200,000 years ago December 31 , 11:59 pm : Revolutionary War - 235 years ago
Stress is the force applied to an object .
In geology , stress is the force per unit area that is placed on a rock .
Rocks under tension lengthen or break apart .
When forces are parallel but moving in opposite directions , the stress is called shear -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The white quartz vein has been elongated by shear .
When stress causes a material to change shape , it has undergone strain or deformation .
A rocks response to stress depends on the rock type , the surrounding temperature , the pressure conditions the rock is under , the length of time the rock is under stress , and the type of stress .
Four types of stresses act on materials .
A deeply buried rock is pushed down by the weight of all the material above it .
Compression squeezes rocks together , causing rocks to fold or fracture -LRB- break -RRB- -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Stress caused these rocks to fracture .
Rocks have three possible responses to increasing stress -LRB- illustrated in Figure 1.3 -RRB- : elastic deformation : the rock returns to its original shape when the stress is removed .
plastic deformation : the rock does not return to its original shape when the stress is removed .
At the Earths surface , rocks usually break quite quickly , but deeper in the crust , where temperatures and pressures are higher , rocks are more likely to deform plastically .
Stress applied over time often leads to plastic deformation .
The heat that is used for geothermal power may come to the surface naturally as hot springs or geysers , like The Geysers in northern California .
Where water does not naturally come to the surface , engineers may pump cool water into the ground .
The water is heated by the hot rock and then pumped back to the surface for use .
The hot water or steam from a geothermal well spins a turbine to make electricity .
The energy source is renewable since hot rock is found everywhere in the Earth , although in many parts of the world the hot rock is not close enough to the surface for building geothermal power plants .
In the United States , California is a leader in producing geothermal energy .
Nearly all glacial ice , 99 % , is contained in ice sheets in the polar regions , particularly Antarctica and Greenland .
Glaciers often form in the mountains because higher altitudes are colder and more likely to have snow that falls and collects .
The types of glaciers are : Continental glaciers are large ice sheets that cover relatively flat ground .
These glaciers flow outward from where the greatest amounts of snow and ice accumulate .
Alpine -LRB- valley -RRB- glaciers flow downhill from where the snow and ice accumulates through mountains along existing valleys .
Ice caps are large glaciers that cover a larger area than just a valley , possibly an entire mountain range or region .
Glaciers come off of ice caps into valleys .
The Greenland ice cap covers the entire landmass .
Glaciers grow when more snow falls near the top of the glacier , in the zone of accumulation , than is melted from lower down in the glacier , in the zone of ablation .
These two zones are separated by the equilibrium line .
Snow falls and over time converts to granular ice known as firn .
Eventually , as more snow and ice collect , the firn becomes denser and converts to glacial ice .
Water is too warm for a glacier to form , so they form only on land .
A glacier may run out from land into water , but it usually breaks up into icebergs that eventually melt into the water .
Whether an ice field moves or not depends on the amount of ice in the field , the steepness of the slope and the roughness of the ground surface .
Ice moves where the pressure is so great that it undergoes plastic flow .
Ice also slides at the bottom , often lubricated by water that has melted and travels between the ground and the ice .
The speed of a glacier ranges from extremely fast , where conditions are favorable , to nearly zero .
Because the ice is moving , glaciers have crevasses , where cracks form in the ice as a result of movement .
The large crevasse at the top of an alpine glacier where ice that is moving is separated from ice that is stuck to the mountain above is called a bergshrund .
Glaciers are melting back in many locations around the world .
When a glacier no longer moves , it is called an ice sheet .
This usually happens when it is less than 0.1 km2 in area and 50 m thick .
Summer temperatures have risen rapidly in this part of the country and so the rate of melting has picked up .
This satellite image shows Grinnell Glacier , Swiftcurrent Glacier , and Gem Glacier in 2003 with an outline of the extent of the glaciers as they were in 1950 .
Although it continues to be classified as a glacier , Gem Glacier is only 0.020 km2 -LRB- 5 acres -RRB- in area , only one-fifth the size of the smallest active glaciers .
In regions where summers are long and dry , melting glaciers in mountain regions provide an important source of water for organisms and often for nearby human populations .
With more greenhouse gases trapping heat , average annual global temperatures are rising .
This is known as global warming .
While temperatures have risen since the end of the Pleistocene , 10,000 years ago , this rate of increase has been more rapid in the past century , and has risen even faster since 1990 .
The 10 warmest years in the 134-year record have all occurred since in the 21st century , and only one year during the 20th century -LRB- 1998 -RRB- was warmer than 2013 , the 4th warmest year on record -LRB- through 2013 -RRB- -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Annual variations aside , the average global temperature increased about 0.8 o C -LRB- 1.5 o F -RRB- between 1880 and 2010 , according to the Goddard Institute for Space Studies , NOAA .
This number doesnt seem very large .
As a result of Chinas rapid economic growth , its emissions surpassed those of the United States in 2008 .
The average United States citizen produces far more greenhouse gas emissions than the average Chinese person .
The following images show changes in the Earth and organisms as a result of global warming : Figure 1.2 , Figure -LRB- a -RRB- Breakup of the Larsen Ice Shelf in Antarctica in 2002 was related to climate warming in the region .
-LRB- b -RRB- The Boulder Glacier has melted back tremendously since 1985 .
-LRB- a -RRB- Melting ice caps add water to the oceans , so sea level is rising .
Remember that water slightly expands as it warms this expansion is also causing sea level to rise .
Snow blanketed the west - ern United States in December 2009 .
-LRB- c -RRB- As surface seas warm , phytoplankton productivity has decreased .
-LRB- d -RRB- Coral reefs are dying worldwide ; corals that are stressed by high temperatures turn white .
-LRB- e -RRB- Pine beetle infestations have killed trees in western North America The insects have expanded their ranges into areas that were once too cold .
Other mountain glaciers around the world are also melting .
Warming temperatures are bringing changes to much of the planet , including California .
Sea level is rising , snow pack is changing , and the ecology of the state is responding to these changes .
Species that can are moving their ranges uphill .
Some regions that were already marginal for agriculture are no longer arable because they have become too warm or dry .
What are the two major effects being seen in this animation ?
Glaciers are melting and vegetation zones are moving uphill .
If fossil fuel use exploded in the 1950s , why do these changes begin early in the animation ?
Isaac Newton first described gravity as the force that causes objects to fall to the ground and also the force that keeps the Moon circling Earth instead of flying off into space in a straight line .
Newton defined the Universal Law of Gravitation , which states that a force of attraction , called gravity , exists between all objects in the universe -LRB- Figure from each other .
Gravity keeps each planet orbiting the Sun because the star and its planets are very large objects .
The force of gravity also holds moons in orbit around planets .
The force of gravity exists between all objects in the universe ; the strength of the force depends on the mass of the objects and the distance between them .
The exception to Earths temperature being in balance is caused by greenhouse gases .
Greenhouse gases warm the atmosphere by trapping heat .
Some of the heat that radiates out from the ground is trapped by greenhouse gases in the troposphere .
Like a blanket on a sleeping person , greenhouse gases act as insulation for the planet .
The warming of the atmosphere because of insulation by greenhouse gases is called the greenhouse effect -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Greenhouse gases include CO2 , H2 O , methane , O3 , nitrous oxides -LRB- NO and NO2 -RRB- , and chlorofluorocarbons -LRB- CFCs -RRB- .
Table 1.1 shows how each greenhouse gas naturally enters the atmosphere .
Greenhouse Gas Carbon dioxide Methane Nitrous oxide Ozone Chlorofluorocarbons Where It Comes From Respiration , volcanic eruptions , decomposition of plant material ; burning of fossil fuels Decomposition of plant material under some condi - tions , biochemical reactions in stomachs Produced by bacteria Atmospheric processes Not naturally occurring ; made by humans Different greenhouse gases have different abilities to trap heat .
Human activity has significantly raised the levels of many of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere .
Carbon dioxide has increased more than 35 % .
CFCs have only recently existed .
The increase or decrease of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere affect climate and weather the world over .
To be a good aquifer , the rock in the aquifer must have good : porosity : small spaces between grains permeability : connections between pores To reach an aquifer , surface water infiltrates downward into the ground through tiny spaces or pores in the rock .
The water travels down through the permeable rock until it reaches a layer that does not have pores ; this rock is impermeable -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
This impermeable rock layer forms the base of the aquifer .
The upper surface where the groundwater reaches is the water table .
Groundwater is found beneath the solid surface .
Notice that the water table roughly mirrors the slope of the lands surface .
A well penetrates the water table .
For a groundwater aquifer to contain the same amount of water , the amount of recharge must equal the amount of discharge .
People take water from aquifers , too .
What happens to the water table when there is a lot of rainfall ?
Although groundwater levels do not rise and fall as rapidly as at the surface , over time the water table will rise during wet periods and fall during droughts .
In wet regions , streams are fed by groundwater ; the surface of the stream is the top of the water table -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
In dry regions , water seeps down from the stream into the aquifer .
Water leaves a groundwater reservoir in streams or springs .
Groundwater meets the surface in a stream -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- or a spring -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
A spring may be constant , or may only flow at certain times of year .
Towns in many locations depend on water from springs .
A well is created by digging or drilling to reach groundwater .
It is important for anyone who intends to dig a well to know how deep beneath the surface the water table is .
When the water table is close to the surface , wells are a convenient method for extracting water .
The stream feeds the aquifer .
A spring in Croatia bubbles to the surface and feeds the river Cetina .
Most wells use motorized pumps to bring water to the surface , but some still require people to use a bucket to draw water up -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
An old-fashioned well that uses a bucket drawn up by hand .
Some aquifers are overused ; people pump out more water than is replaced .
As the water is pumped out , the water table slowly falls , requiring wells to be dug deeper , which takes more money and energy .
Wells may go completely dry if they are not deep enough to reach into the lowered water table .
Other problems may stem from groundwater overuse .
The Ogallala Aquifer supplies about one-third of the irrigation water in the United States .
The aquifer is found from 30 to 100 meters deep over an area of about 440,000 square kilometers !
About eight times more water is taken from the Ogallala Aquifer each year than is replenished .
Much of the water is used for irrigation -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
URL : Intense drought has reduced groundwater levels in the southern U.S. , particularly in Texas and New Mexico .
Lowering the water table may cause the ground surface to sink .
Subsidence may occur beneath houses and other structures -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
When coastal aquifers are overused , salt water from the ocean may enter the aquifer , contaminating the aquifer and making it less useful for drinking and irrigation .
Salt water incursion is a problem in developed coastal regions , such as on Hawaii .
For example , irrigation water infiltrates into the ground , bringing with it the pesticides , fertilizers , and herbicides that were sprayed on the fields .
Water that seeps through landfills also carries toxins into the ground .
Toxic substances and things like gasoline are kept in underground storage tanks ; more than 100,000 of the tanks are currently leaking and many more may develop leaks .
Groundwater is a bit safer from pollution than surface water from some types of pollution because some pollutants are filtered out by the rock and soil that water travels through as it travels through the ground or once it is in the aquifer .
But rock and soil cant get out everything , depending on the type of rock and soil and on the types of pollutants .
When the pollutant enters the aquifer , contamination spreads in the water outward from the source and travels in the direction that the water is moving .
This pollutant plume may travel very slowly , only a few inches a day , but over time can contaminate a large portion of the aquifer .
In Florida , for example , more than 90 % of wells have detectible contaminants and thousands have been closed .
The entire human popula - tion was estimated to be 5 million in 8000 B.C.
300 million in A.D. 1 1 billion in 1802 3 billion in 1961 7 billion in 2011 As the human population continues to grow , different factors limit population in different parts of the world .
Space , clean air , clean water , and food to feed everyone are limiting in some locations .
The population was estimated to reach 7 billion in 2012 , but it did so in 2011 , just 12 years after reaching 6 billion .
Human population from 10,000 BC through 2000 AD , showing the exponential increase in human population that has occurred in the last few centuries .
Although population continues to grow rapidly , the rate that the growth rate is increasing has declined .
Still , a recent estimate by the United Nations estimates that 10.1 billion people will be sharing this planet by the end of the century .
Hazardous waste is any waste material that is dangerous to human health or that degrades the environment .
Haz - ardous waste includes substances that are : 1 .
Many people have substances that could become hazardous wastes in their homes .
Several cleaning and gardening chemicals are hazardous if not used properly .
These include chemicals like drain cleaners and pesticides that are toxic to humans and many other creatures .
While these chemicals are fine if they are stored and used properly , if they are used or disposed of improperly , they may become hazardous wastes .
Others sources of hazardous waste are shown in Table 1.1 .
Toxic ; many cause cancer in hu - mans .
Corrosive : destroys other things by chemical reactions .
Flammable : easily catches fire and may send dangerous smoke into the air .
About half of the solar radiation that strikes the top of the atmosphere is filtered out before it reaches the ground .
This energy can be absorbed by atmospheric gases , reflected by clouds , or scattered .
Scattering occurs when a light wave strikes a particle and bounces off in some other direction .
About 3 % of the energy that strikes the ground is reflected back into the atmosphere .
The rest is absorbed by rocks , soil , and water and then radiated back into the air as heat .
These infrared wavelengths can only be seen by infrared sensors .
Because solar energy continually enters Earths atmosphere and ground surface , is the planet getting hotter ?
The answer is no -LRB- although the next section contains an exception -RRB- , because energy from Earth escapes into space through the top of the atmosphere .
Equatorial Region Polar Regions Day Length Nearly the same all year Night 6 months Sun Angle High Solar Radiation High Albedo Low Low Low High Note : Colder temperatures mean more ice and snow cover the ground , making albedo relatively high .
The difference in solar energy received at different latitudes drives atmospheric circulation .
If the amount that exits is equal to the amount that comes in , then average global temperature stays the same .
This means that the planets heat budget is in balance .
What happens if more energy comes in than goes out ?
If more energy goes out than comes in ?
Where do you think the most solar energy ends up and why ?
Where does the least solar energy end up and why ?
Heat moves in the atmosphere the same way it moves through the solid Earth or another medium .
What follows is a review of the way heat flows , but applied to the atmosphere .
Heat radiates from the ground into the lower atmosphere .
Warmer molecules vibrate rapidly and collide with other nearby molecules , transferring their energy .
This transfers heat upward to where the molecules are spread further apart or transfers heat laterally from a warmer to a cooler spot , where the molecules are moving less vigorously .
Heat transfer by movement of heated materials is called convection .
Heat that radiates from the ground initiates convection cells in the atmosphere -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Different parts of the Earth receive different amounts of solar radiation .
Which part of the planet receives the most solar radiation ?
The Suns rays strike the surface most directly at the Equator .
A heat wave is different depending on its location .
According to the World Meteorological Organization , a region is in a heat wave if it has more than five consecutive days of temperatures that are more than 9 F -LRB- 5 C -RRB- above average .
Heat waves have increased in frequency and duration in recent years .
The summer 2011 North American heat wave brought record temperatures across the Midwestern and Eastern United States .
Many states and localities broke records for temperatures and for most days above 100 F.
A high pressure cell sitting over a region with no movement is the likely cause of a heat wave .
A high pressure zone kept the jet stream further north than normal for August .
A heat wave over the United States as in - dicated by heat radiated from the ground .
Droughts also depend on what is normal for a region .
When a region gets significantly less precipitation than normal for an extended period of time , it is in drought .
The Southern United States is experiencing an ongoing and prolonged drought .
When soil loses moisture it may blow away , as happened during the Dust Bowl in the United States in the 1930s .
Wildfires become much more common during times of drought .
Water sometimes comes into contact with hot rock .
The water may emerge at the surface as either a hot spring or a geyser .
Water heated below ground that rises through a crack to the surface creates a hot spring .
The water in hot springs may reach temperatures in the hundreds of degrees Celsius beneath the surface , although most hot springs are much cooler .
Geysers are also created by water that is heated beneath the Earths surface , but geysers do not bubble to the surface they erupt .
When water is both superheated by magma and flows through a narrow passageway underground , the environment is ideal for a geyser .
Castle erupts regularly , but not as frequently or predictably as Old Faithful .
Eventually , the pressure grows so great that the superheated water bursts out onto the surface to create a geyser .
Of the roughly 1,000 geysers worldwide , about half are found in the United States .
Hot Creek in California deserves its name ; Like Yellowstone , it is above a supervolcano .
Steno was struck by the resemblance of the sharks teeth to fossils found in inland mountains and hills -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Fossils include body fossils , left behind when the soft parts have decayed away , and trace fossils , such as burrows , tracks , or fossilized coprolites -LRB- feces -RRB- .
In shallow water , wave action grinds them into sand-sized pieces .
The shells are also attacked by worms , sponges , and other animals -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Insects , which are by far the most common land animals , are only rarely found as fossils -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Think about an antelope that dies on the African plain -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
A storm at sea may shift sediment on the ocean floor , covering a body and helping to preserve its skeletal remains -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
This fish was quickly buried in sediment to become a fossil .
Artists concept of animals surrounding the La Brea Tar Pits .
-LRB- a -RRB- The Burgess shale contains soft-bodied fossils .
-LRB- b -RRB- Anomalocaris , meaning abnormal shrimp is now extinct .
Surface currents play an enormous role in Earths climate .
Even though the Equator and poles have very different climates , these regions would have more extremely different climates if ocean currents did not transfer heat from the equatorial regions to the higher latitudes .
In contrast , Quebec is much drier and receives its precipitation as snow .
Water that enters the Gulf Stream is heated as it travels along the Equator .
The warm water then flows up the east coast of North America and across the Atlantic Ocean to Europe -LRB- see opening image -RRB- .
The Gulf Streams warm waters raise temperatures in the North Sea , which raises the air temperatures over land between 3 to 6 C -LRB- 5 to 11 F -RRB- .
Because air traveling over the warm water in the Gulf Stream picks up a lot of water , London gets a lot of rain .
Humans evolved during the later Cenozoic .
Humans evolved from primates , and apes and humans have a primate common ancestor .
About 7 million years ago , chimpanzees -LRB- our closest living relatives -RRB- and humans shared their last common ancestor .
Homo sapiens , our species , originated about 200,000 years ago in Africa .
Evidence of a spiritual life appears about 32,000 years ago with stone figurines that probably have religious significance -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The ice ages allowed humans to migrate .
During the ice ages , water was frozen in glaciers and so land bridges such as the Bering Strait allowed humans to walk from the old world to the new world .
DNA evidence suggests that the humans who migrated out of Africa interbred with Neanderthal since these people contain some Neanderthal DNA .
URL : Stone figurines likely indicate a spiritual life .
Standing on two feet allows an organism to see and also to use its hands and arms for hunting .
By the time of Australopithecus afarensis , between 3.9 and 2.9 million years ago , these human ancestors were completely bipedal and their brains were growing rapidly -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Australopithecus afarensis is a human ancestor that lived about 3 million years ago .
The genus Homo appeared about 2.5 million years ago .
Humans developed the first stone tools .
Homo erectus evolved in Africa about 1.8 million years ago .
Fossils of these animals show a much more human-like body structure , which allowed them to travel long distances to hunt .
Different factors play into the composition of a magma and the rock it produces .
The rock beneath the Earths surface is sometimes heated to high enough temperatures that it melts to create magma .
Different magmas have different composition and contain whatever elements were in the rock or rocks that melted .
The main elements are the same as the elements found in the crust .
Table 1.1 lists the abundance of elements found in the Earths crust and in magma .
The remaining 1.5 % is made up of many other elements that are present in tiny quantities .
Whether rock melts to create magma depends on : Temperature : Temperature increases with depth , so melting is more likely to occur at greater depths .
Pressure : Pressure increases with depth , but increased pressure raises the melting temperature , so melting is less likely to occur at higher pressures .
Water : The addition of water changes the melting point of rock .
As the amount of water increases , the melting point decreases .
Rock composition : Minerals melt at different temperatures , so the temperature must be high enough to melt at least some minerals in the rock .
The different geologic settings that produce varying conditions under which rocks melt will be discussed in the chapter Plate Tectonics .
As a rock heats up , the minerals that melt at the lowest temperatures melt first .
Partial melting occurs when the temperature on a rock is high enough to melt only some of the minerals in the rock .
This process describes the crystallization of different minerals as magma cools .
Bowens Reaction Series indicates the temperatures at which minerals melt or crystallize -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
An under - standing of the way atoms join together to form minerals leads to an understanding of how different igneous rocks form .
Bowens Reaction Series also explains why some minerals are always found together and some are never found together .
If the liquid separates from the solids at any time in partial melting or fractional crystallization , the chemical composition of the liquid and solid will be different .
The amount CO2 levels will rise in the next decades is unknown .
In the developed nations it will depend on technological advances or lifestyle changes that decrease emissions .
In the developing nations , it will depend on how much their lifestyles improve and how these improvements are made .
If nothing is done to decrease the rate of CO2 emissions , by 2030 , CO2 emissions are projected to be 63 % greater than they were in 2002 .
Computer models are used to predict the effects of greenhouse gas increases on climate for the planet as a whole and also for specific regions .
If nothing is done to control greenhouse gas emissions and they continue to increase at current rates , the surface temperature of the Earth can be expected to increase between 0.5 o C and 2.0 o C -LRB- 0.9 o F and 3.6 o F -RRB- by 2050 and between 2o and 4.5 o C -LRB- 3.5 o and 8o F -RRB- by 2100 , with CO2 levels over 800 parts per million -LRB- ppm -RRB- .
Global CO2 emissions are rising rapidly .
The industrial revolution began about 1850 and industrialization has been ac - celerating .
On the other hand , if severe limits on CO2 emissions begin soon , temperatures could rise less than 1.1 o C -LRB- 2o F -RRB- by 2100 .
A rise of 2.8 o C -LRB- 5o F -RRB- would result in 0.6 o to 1.2 o C -LRB- 1o to 2o F -RRB- at the Equator , but up to 6.7 o C -LRB- 12o F -RRB- at the poles .
So far , global warming has affected the North Pole more than the South Pole , but temperatures are still increasing at Antarctica -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Oceans will become more acidic , making it more difficult for creatures with carbonate shells to grow , and that includes coral reefs .
Weather will become more extreme , with more frequent and more intense heat waves and droughts .
Some modelers predict that the midwestern United States will become too dry to support agriculture and that Canada will become the new breadbasket .
In all , about 10 % to 50 % of current cropland worldwide may become unusable if CO2 doubles .
You may notice that the numerical predictions above contain wide ranges .
It is partly because scientists can not predict exactly how the Earth will respond to increased levels of greenhouses gases .
How quickly greenhouse gases continue to build up in the atmosphere depends in part on the choices we make .
An important question people ask is this : Are the increases in global temperature natural ?
A study monitoring ocean acidity in the Pacific Northwest found ocean acidity increasing ten times faster than expected and 10 % to 20 % of shellfish -LRB- mussels -RRB- being replaced by acid-tolerant algae .
Changes in the Suns irradiance , El Nio and La Nia cycles , natural changes in greenhouse gas , and other atmospheric gases can not account for the increase in temperature that has already happened in the past decades .
Changes are happening slowly in the coastal arena of the San Francisco Bay Area and even the most optimistic estimates about how high and how quickly this rise will occur indicate potentially huge problems for the region .
Plant and animal species seeking cooler temperatures will need to move poleward 100 to 150 km -LRB- 60 to 90 miles -RRB- or upward 150 m -LRB- 500 feet -RRB- for each 1.0 o C -LRB- 8o F -RRB- rise in global temperature .
Biologists have already documented the extinction of high-altitude species that have nowhere higher to go .
Decreased snow packs , shrinking glaciers , and the earlier arrival of spring will all lessen the amount of water available in some regions of the world , including the western United States and much of Asia .
Ice will continue to melt and sea level is predicted to rise 18 to 97 cm -LRB- 7 to 38 inches -RRB- by 2100 -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
An increase this large will gradually flood coastal regions , where about one-third of the worlds population lives , forcing billions of people to move inland .
Sea ice thickness around the North Pole has been decreasing in recent decades and will continue to decrease in the com - ing decades .
The story of Love Canal , New York , begins in the 1950s , when a local chemical company placed hazardous wastes in 55-gallon steel drums and buried them .
Love Canal was an abandoned waterway near Niagara Falls and was thought to be a safe site for hazardous waste disposal because the ground was fairly impermeable -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
In 1977 a swamp created by heavy rains was found to contain 82 toxic chemicals , including 11 suspected cancer-causing chemicals .
A Love Canal resident , Lois Gibbs , organized a group of citizens called the Love Canal Homeowners Association to try to find out what was causing the problems -LRB- See opening image -RRB- .
When they discovered that toxic chemicals were buried beneath their homes and school , they demanded that the government take action to clean up the area and remove the chemicals .
After burial , the company covered the containers with soil and sold the land to the local school system for $ 1 .
The company warned the school district that the site had been used for toxic waste disposal .
Steel drums were used to contain 21,000 tons of hazardous chemicals at Love Canal .
Soon a school , a playground , and 100 homes were built on the site .
The impermeable ground was breached when sewer systems were dug into the rock layer .
Over time , the steel drums rusted and the chemicals were released into the ground .
In the 1960s people began to notice bad odors .
Children developed burns after playing in the soil , and they were often sick .
In 1978 , people were relocated to safe areas .
This law requires companies to be responsible for hazardous chemicals that they put into the environment and to pay to clean up polluted sites , which can often cost hundreds of millions of dollars .
Love Canal became a Superfund site in 1983 and as a result , several measures were taken to secure the toxic wastes .
The land was capped so that water could not reach the waste , debris was cleaned from the nearby area , and contaminated soils were removed .
The pollution at Love Canal was not initially visible , but it became visible .
The effects of the contamination that were seen in human health included sickness in children and a higher than normal number of miscarriages in pregnant women .
Toxic chemicals may cause cancer and birth defects .
Because young organisms grow more rapidly , they take in more of the toxic chemicals and are more affected .
Sometimes the chemicals are not so easily seen as they were at Love Canal .
But the impacts can be seen statistically .
For example , contaminated drinking water may cause an increase in some types of cancer in a community .
A certain number of people get cancer all the time .
To identify contamination , a number of cancers above the normal rate , called a cancer cluster , must be discovered .
A case that was made into a book and movie called A Civil Action involved the community of Woburn , Massachusetts .
Groundwater contamination was initially suspected because of an increase in childhood leukemia and other illnesses .
As a result of concern by parents , the well water was analyzed and shown to have high levels of TCE -LRB- trichloroethylene -RRB- .
Lead was once a common ingredient in gasoline and paint , but it was shown to damage human brains and nervous systems .
Sources of mercury include volcanic eruptions , coal burning , and wastes such as batteries , electronic switches , and electronic appliances such as television sets .
Like lead , mercury damages the brain and impairs nervous system function .
More about the hazards of mercury pollution can be found later in this concept .
Since young children are growing rapidly , lead is especially harmful in children under the age of six -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
In the 1970s and 1980s , the United States government passed laws completely banning lead in gasoline and paint .
Homes built before the 1970s may contain lead paint .
Paint so old is likely to be peeling and poses a great threat to human health .
About 200 children die every year from lead poisoning .
Mercury is a pollutant that can easily spread around the world .
Earths atmosphere is a thin blanket of gases and tiny particles together called air .
Much of what makes Earth exceptional depends on the atmosphere .
For example , all living things need some of the gases in air for life support .
Without the atmosphere , Earth would look a lot more like the Moon .
How does the atmosphere make life possible ?
How does life alter the atmosphere ?
In photosynthesis , plants use CO2 and create O2 .
Photosynthesis is responsible for nearly all of the oxygen currently found in the atmosphere .
By creating oxygen and food , plants have made an environment that is favorable for animals .
In respiration , animals use oxygen to convert sugar into food energy they can use .
In photosynthesis , CO2 is converted to O2 and in respiration , O2 is converted to CO2 -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
As part of the hydrologic cycle , water spends a lot of time in the atmosphere , mostly as water vapor .
Chlorophyll indicates the presence of photosynthesizing plants as does the veg - etation index .
Ozone in the upper atmosphere absorbs high-energy ultraviolet -LRB- UV -RRB- radiation coming from the Sun .
This protects living things on Earths surface from the Suns most harmful rays .
Without ozone for protection , only the simplest life forms would be able to live on Earth .
Along with the oceans , the atmosphere keeps Earths temperatures within an acceptable range .
Without an atmo - sphere , Earths temperatures would be frigid at night and scorching during the day .
If the 12-year-old in the scenario above asked why , she would find out .
Important greenhouse gases include carbon dioxide , methane , water vapor , and ozone .
The atmosphere is made of gases that take up space and transmit energy .
Sound waves are among the types of energy that travel though the atmosphere .
Of course , no insect , bird , or airplane would be able to fly , because there would be no atmosphere to hold it up .
The oceans , along with the atmosphere , keep temperatures fairly constant worldwide .
While some places on Earth get as cold as -70 o C and others as hot as 55o C , the range is only 125o C. On Mercury temperatures go from -180 o C to 430o C , a range of 610o C . The oceans , along with the atmosphere , distribute heat around the planet .
The oceans absorb heat near the Equator and then move that solar energy to more polar regions .
Summer temperatures are not as hot , and winter temperatures are not as cold , because water takes a long time to heat up or cool down .
Since they cover so much of the planet , most evaporation comes from oceans and most precipitation falls on oceans .
Tiny ocean plants , called phytoplankton , create the base of a food web that supports all sorts of life forms .
Marine life makes up the majority of all biomass on Earth .
-LRB- Biomass is the total mass of living organisms in a given area . -RRB-
These organisms supply us with food and even the oxygen created by marine plants .
Polar bears are well adapted to frigid Arc - tic waters .
A beautiful example of this effect is the `` Stone Forest '' in China , see the video below : The Shiprock formation in northwest New Mexico is the central plug of resistant lava from which the surrounding rock weath - ered and eroded away .
Other types of rock , such as limestone , are easily weathered because they dissolve in weak acids .
Rocks that resist weathering remain at the surface and form ridges or hills .
Shiprock in New Mexico is the throat of a volcano thats left after the rest of the volcano eroded away .
The rock thats left behind is magma that cooled relatively slowly and is harder than the rock that had surrounded it .
Different minerals also weather at different rates .
Some minerals in a rock might completely dissolve in water , but the more resistant minerals remain .
In this case , the rocks surface becomes pitted and rough .
Climate is determined by the temperature of a region plus the amount of precipitation it receives .
This happens because plants and bacteria grow and multiply faster in warmer temperatures .
Climate is weather averaged over a long period of time .
Chemical weathering increases as : Temperature increases : Chemical reactions proceed more rapidly at higher temperatures .
For each 10o C increase in average temperature , the rate of chemical reactions doubles .
Precipitation increases : More water allows more chemical reactions .
Since water participates in both mechan - ical and chemical weathering , more water strongly increases weathering .
So how do different climates influence weathering ?
A cold , dry climate will produce the lowest rate of weathering .
A warm , wet climate will produce the highest rate of weathering .
Some resources are concentrated by weathering processes .
In tropical climates , intense chemical weathering carries away all soluble minerals , leaving behind just the least soluble components .
Figure 1.1 shows the relative sizes of these four inner planets .
Of course , the inner planets have shorter orbits around the Sun , and they all spin more slowly .
Geologically , the inner planets are all made of cooled igneous rock with iron cores , and all have been geologically active , at least early in their history .
URL : This composite shows the relative sizes of the four inner planets .
Figure 1.2 shows the relative sizes of the outer planets and the Sun .
URL : This image shows the four outer planets and the Sun , with sizes to scale .
These planets are much larger than the inner planets and are made primarily of gases and liquids , so they are also called gas giants .
The gas giants are made up primarily of hydrogen and helium , the same elements that make up most of the Sun .
Astronomers think that hydrogen and helium gases comprised much of the solar system when it first formed .
Since the inner planets didnt have enough mass to hold on to these light gases , their hydrogen and helium floated away into space .
The Sun and the massive outer planets had enough gravity to keep hydrogen and helium from drifting away .
They all also have planetary rings , composed of dust and other small particles that encircle the planet in a thin plane .
Recall from Concept Plate Tectonics that Wegener used the presence of coal beds in Antarctica as one of the lines of evidence for continental drift .
Clues to the End - Permian Extinction Click image to the left for more content .
Why is the paleocologists collecting samples ?
Groundwater resides in aquifers , porous rock and sediment with water in between .
Water is attracted to the soil particles , and capillary action , which describes how water moves through porous media , moves water from wet soil to dry areas .
Aquifers are found at different depths .
Some are just below the surface and some are found much deeper below the land surface .
The amount of water that is available to enter groundwater in a region , called recharge , is influenced by the local climate , the slope of the land , the type of rock found at the surface , the vegetation cover , land use in the area , and water retention , which is the amount of water that remains in the ground .
More water goes into the ground where there is a lot of rain , flat land , porous rock , exposed soil , and where water is not already filling the soil and rock .
Groundwater is often called fossil water because it has remained in the ground for so long , often since the end of the ice ages .
A diagram of groundwater flow through aquifers showing residence times .
Deeper aquifers typically contain older `` fossil water . ''
The rate at which magma cools determines whether an igneous rock is intrusive or extrusive .
The cooling rate is reflected in the rocks texture .
Igneous rocks are called intrusive when they cool and solidify beneath the surface .
Intrusive rocks form plutons and so are also called plutonic .
Figure 1.2 shows a landscape in Californias Sierra Nevada Mountains made of granite that has been raised to create mountains .
Californias Sierra Nevada Mountains are intrusive igneous rock exposed at Earths surface .
A pluton is an igneous intrusive rock body that has cooled in the crust .
When magma cools within the Earth , the cooling proceeds slowly .
Slow cooling allows time for large crystals to form , so intrusive igneous rocks have visible crystals .
Igneous rocks make up most of the rocks on Earth .
Most igneous rocks are buried below the surface and covered with sedimentary rock , or are buried beneath the ocean water .
In some places , geological processes have brought Granite is made of four minerals , all visible to the naked eye : feldspar -LRB- white -RRB- , quartz -LRB- translucent -RRB- , hornblende -LRB- black -RRB- , and bi - otite -LRB- black , platy -RRB- .
Igneous rocks are called extrusive when they cool and solidify above the surface .
These rocks usually form from a volcano , so they are also called volcanic rocks -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Lavas that cool extremely rapidly may have a glassy texture .
Different cooling rate and gas content resulted in these different textures .
Extrusive igneous rocks cool much more rapidly than intrusive rocks .
The rock has large crystals set within a matrix of tiny crystals .
In this Extrusive igneous rocks form after lava cools above the surface .
Cooling rate and gas content create other textures -LRB- see Figure 1.5 for examples of different textures -RRB- .
It takes Jupiter about 12 Earth years to orbit once around the Sun .
Astronauts trying to land a spaceship on the surface of Jupiter would find that there is no solid surface at all !
Jupiter is made mostly of hydrogen , with some helium , and small amounts of other elements -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Jupiters atmosphere is composed of hydrogen and helium .
Deeper within the planet , pressure compresses the gases into a liquid .
Some evidence suggests that Jupiter may have a small rocky core of heavier elements at its center .
The colors were later enhanced to bring out more details .
The upper layer of Jupiters atmosphere contains clouds of ammonia -LRB- NH3 -RRB- in bands of different colors .
These bands rotate around the planet , but also swirl around in turbulent storms .
The Great Red Spot -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- is an enormous , oval-shaped storm found south of Jupiters equator .
Clouds in the storm rotate in a counterclockwise direction , making one complete turn every six days or so .
The Great Red Spot has been on Jupiter for at least 300 years , since astronomers could first see the storm through telescopes .
This image of Jupiters Great Red Spot -LRB- upper right of image -RRB- was taken by the Voyager 1 spacecraft .
Jupiter has a very large number of moons 63 have been discovered so far .
Four are big enough and bright enough to be seen from Earth , using no more than a pair of binoculars .
In 1979 , two spacecraft Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 visited Jupiter and its moons .
Photos from the Voyager missions showed that Jupiter has a ring system .
This ring system is very faint , so it is difficult to observe from Earth .
This composite image shows the four Galilean moons and their sizes relative to the Great Red Spot .
These moons Io , Europa , Ganymede , and Callisto were first discovered by Galileo in 1610 , so they are sometimes referred to as the Galilean moons -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Scientists are particularly interested in Europa because it may be a place to find extraterrestrial life .
What features might make a satellite so far from the Sun a candidate for life ?
Europa also has a continual source of energy it is heated as it is stretched and squashed by tidal forces from Jupiter .
Glaciers erode the underlying rock by abrasion and plucking .
Streams plunge over the cliff to create waterfalls -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Up high on a mountain , where a glacier originates , rocks are pulled away from valley walls .
Some of the resulting erosional features are shown in Figure 1.4 and Figure 1.5 .
Glacial striations point the direction a glacier has gone .
URL : Yosemite Valley is known for waterfalls that plunge from hanging valleys .
-LRB- a -RRB- A bowl-shaped cirque in Glacier Na - tional Park was carved by glaciers .
-LRB- b -RRB- A high altitude lake , called a tarn , forms from meltwater trapped in the cirque .
-LRB- c -RRB- Several cirques from glaciers flowing in different directions from a mountain peak , leave behind a sharp sided horn , like the Matterhorn in Switzerland .
-LRB- d -RRB- When glaciers move down opposite sides of a mountain , a sharp edged ridge , called an arte , forms between them .
Snowmelt and melting glaciers combine to create a fast moving stream at Glacier National Park .
The rock is then plucked out and carried away by the flowing ice of the moving glacier -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
With the weight of the ice over them , these rocks can scratch deeply into the underlying bedrock , making long , parallel grooves in the bedrock , called glacial striations .
Mountain glaciers leave behind unique erosional features .
When a glacier cuts through a V-shaped river valley , the glacier plucks rocks from the sides and bottom .
This widens the valley and steepens the walls , making a U-shaped valley -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
A hanging valley forms where the main glacier cuts off a tributary glacier and creates a cliff .
As glaciers flow , mechanical weathering loosens rock on the valley walls , which falls as debris on the glacier .
Glaciers can carry rock of any size , from giant boulders to silt -LRB- Figure 1.6 -RRB- .
These rocks can be carried for many kilometers for many years .
Rocks carried by a glacier are eventually dropped .
These glacial erratics are noticeable because they are a different rock type from the surrounding bedrock .
Melting glaciers deposit all the big and small bits of rocky material they are carrying in a pile .
These unsorted deposits of rock are called glacial till .
End moraines are deposited where the glacier stopped for a long enough period to create a rocky ridge as it retreated .
Long Island in New York is formed by two end moraines .
Glacial till is found in different types of deposits .
Linear rock deposits are called moraines .
Geologists study moraines to figure out how far glaciers extended and how long it took them to melt away .
Moraines are named by their location relative to the glacier : Lateral moraines form at the edges of the glacier as material drops onto the glacier from erosion of the valley walls .
Medial moraines form where the lateral moraines of two tributary glaciers join together in the middle of a larger glacier -LRB- Figure 1.7 -RRB- .
Ground moraines forms from sediments that were beneath the glacier and left behind after the glacier melts .
Ground moraine sediments contribute to the fertile transported soils in many regions .
Terminal moraines are long ridges of till left at the furthest point the glacier reached .
Several types of stratified deposits form in glacial regions but are not formed directly by the ice .
Varves form where lakes are covered by ice in the winter .
Dark , fine-grained clays sink to the bottom in winter , but melting ice in spring brings running water that deposits lighter colored sands .
-LRB- a -RRB- An esker is a winding ridge of sand and gravel deposited under a glacier by a stream of meltwater .
-LRB- b -RRB- A drumlin is an asymmetrical hill made of sediments that points in the direction the ice moved .
Usually drumlins are found in groups called drumlin fields .
Rainwater absorbs carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- as it falls .
The CO2 combines with water to form carbonic acid .
The slightly acidic water sinks into the ground and moves through pore spaces in soil and cracks and fractures in rock .
Groundwater is described further in the chapter Water on Earth .
Groundwater is a strong erosional force , as it works to dissolve away solid rock -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Carbonic acid is especially good at dissolving the rock limestone .
The water dissolves and carries away the solid rock , gradually enlarging the cracks .
Eventually , a cave may form -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
If the roof of a cave collapses , a sinkhole could form .
Some sinkholes are large enough to swallow up a home or several homes in a neighborhood -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Water flows through Russell Cave Na - tional Monument in Alabama .
Groundwater carries dissolved minerals in solution .
The minerals may then be deposited , for example , as stalag - mites or stalactites -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Stalactites hang from the ceiling and stalagmites rise from the floor of Carlsbad Caverns in New Mexico .
The large stalagmite on the right is almost tall enough to reach the ceiling -LRB- or a stalactite -RRB- and form a column .
Stalactites form as calcium carbonate drips from the ceiling of a cave , forming beautiful icicle-like formations .
Stalagmites form as calcium carbonate drips from the ceiling to the floor of a cave and then grow upwards .
The g in stalagmite means it forms on the ground .
If a stalactite and stalagmite join together , they form a column .
One of the wonders of visiting a cave is to witness the beauty of these amazing and strangely captivating structures .
Some of the largest , and most beautiful , natural crystals can be found in the Naica mine , in Mexico .
These gypsum crystals were formed over thousands of years as groundwater , rich in calcium and sulfur flowed through an underground cave .
Accumulated sediments harden into rock by lithification , as illustrated in the Figure 1.1 .
Two important steps are needed for sediments to lithify .
This cliff is made of sandstone .
Sediments are squeezed together by the weight of overlying sediments on top of them .
This is called com - paction .
Cemented , non-organic sediments become clastic rocks .
Fluids fill in the spaces between the loose particles of sediment and crystallize to create a rock by cementation .
The sediment size in clastic sedimentary rocks varies greatly -LRB- see Table in Sedimentary Rocks Classification -RRB- .
Any location on Earths surface or on a map can be described using these coordinates .
Latitude and longitude are expressed as degrees that are divided into 60 minutes .
Each minute is divided into 60 seconds .
What does this mean ?
Latitude tells the distance north or south of the Equator .
Latitude lines start at the Equator and circle around the planet .
The latitude mentioned above does not locate Old Faithful exactly , since a circle could be drawn that latitude north of the Equator .
Longitude lines are circles that go around the Earth from north to south , like the sections of an orange .
Longitude is measured perpendicular to the Equator .
The Prime Meridian is 0o longitude and passes through Greenwich , England .
An accurate location must take into account the third dimension .
Satellites continually orbit Earth and can be used to indicate location .
A global positioning system receiver detects radio signals from at least four nearby GPS satellites .
The receiver measures the time it takes for radio signals to travel from a satellite and then calculates its distance from the satellite using the speed of radio signals .
By calculating distances from each of the four satellites the receiver can triangulate to determine its location .
You can use a GPS meter to tell you how to get to Old Faithful .
Many processes can cause climate to change .
These include changes : In the amount of energy the Sun produces over years .
In greenhouse gases in the atmosphere , caused naturally or by human activities .
Sunspots are magnetic storms on the Suns surface that increase and decrease over an 11-year cycle -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The Little Ice Age corresponded to a time when there were no sunspots on the Sun .
Plate tectonic movements can alter climate .
Over millions of years as seas open and close , ocean currents may distribute heat differently .
This type of eruption is exceedingly rare ; none has occurred since humans have lived on Earth .
For example , when all the continents are joined into one supercontinent -LRB- such as Pangaea -RRB- , nearly all locations experience a continental climate .
When the continents separate , heat is more evenly distributed .
Plate tectonic movements may help start an ice age .
When continents are located near the poles , ice can accumulate , which may increase albedo and lower global temperature .
Low enough temperatures may start a global ice age .
Plate motions trigger volcanic eruptions , which release dust and CO2 into the atmosphere .
Massive eruptions of the fluid lavas that create lava plateaus release much more gas and dust , and can change climate for many years .
Scientists attribute a series of ice ages to variation in the Earths position relative to the Sun , known as Milankovitch cycles .
This results in chilly summers and warmer winters .
The planets tilt on its axis varies between 22.1 o and 24.5 o .
When the tilt angle is smaller , summers and winters differ less in temperature .
Ice ages correspond closely with Milankovitch cycles .
The Earth goes through regular variations in its position relative to the Sun : 1 .
Since glaciers can form only over land , ice ages only occur when landmasses cover the polar regions .
Therefore , Milankovitch cycles are also connected to plate tectonics .
The shape of the Earths orbit changes slightly as it goes around the Sun .
The orbit varies from more circular to more elliptical in a cycle lasting between 90,000 and 100,000 years .
The planet wobbles on its axis of rotation .
Since greenhouse gases trap the heat that radiates off the planets surfaces , what would happen to global temperatures if atmospheric greenhouse gas levels decreased ?
So CO2 is removed from the atmosphere .
What happens to atmospheric CO2 when the fossil fuels are burned ?
BP means years before present .
A decrease in greenhouse gas levels decreases global temperature and an increase raises global temperature .
Greenhouse gas levels have varied throughout Earth history .
But for at least 650,000 years , CO2 has never risen above 300 ppm , during either glacial or interglacial periods -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Natural processes add and remove CO2 from the atmosphere .
Processes that add CO2 : volcanic eruptions decay or burning of organic matter .
Processes that remove CO2 : absorption by plant and animal tissue .
When plants are turned into fossil fuels , the CO2 in their tissue is stored with them .
Shipboard magnetometers reveal the magnetic polarity of the rock beneath them .
The practice of towing a magnetometer began during WWII when navy ships towed magnetometers to search for enemy submarines .
When scientists plotted the points of normal and reversed polarity on a seafloor map they made an astonishing discovery : the normal and reversed magnetic polarity of seafloor basalts creates a pattern .
Stripes of normal polarity and reversed polarity alternate across the ocean bottom .
The magnetic stripes are what created the Figure 1.1 .
Research cruises today tow magnetometers to add detail to existing magnetic polarity data .
By combining magnetic polarity data from rocks on land and on the seafloor with radiometric age dating and fossil ages , scientists came up with a time scale for the magnetic reversals .
Seafloor is youngest at the mid-ocean ridges and becomes progressively older with distance from the ridge .
How can you explain the observations that scientists have made in the oceans ?
The scientists suggested that seafloor was being created at the ridge .
Since the planet is not getting larger , they suggested that it is destroyed in a relatively short amount of geologic time .
The scientists noticed that the rocks got older with distance from the mid-ocean ridges .
Scientists also noticed that the characteristics of the rocks and sediments changed with distance from the ridge axis as seen in the Table 1.1 .
Rock ages At ridge axis With distance from axis youngest becomes older Sediment thickness none becomes thicker Crust thickness Heat flow thinnest becomes thicker hottest becomes cooler Away from the ridge crest , sediment becomes older and thicker , and the seafloor becomes thicker .
Heat flow , which indicates the warmth of a region , is highest at the ridge crest .
The next breakthrough in the development of the theory of plate tectonics came two decades after Wegeners death .
Magnetite crystals are shaped like a tiny bar magnet .
When the lava is completely cooled , the crystals point in the direction of magnetic north pole at the time they form .
How do you expect this would help scientists see whether continents had moved or not ?
A magnetometer is a device capable of measuring the magnetic field intensity .
First , youre going to look at rocks on land .
Geologists noted important things about the magnetic polarity of different aged rocks on the same continent : Magnetite crystals in fresh volcanic rocks point to the current magnetic north pole -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- no matter what continent or where on the continent the rocks are located .
Older rocks that are of different ages do not point to the same locations or to the current magnetic north pole .
In other words , although the magnetite crystals were pointing to the magnetic north pole , the location of the pole seemed to wander .
Scientists were amazed to find that the north magnetic pole changed location over time -LRB- Figure Can you figure out the three possible explanations for this ?
The continents remained fixed and the north magnetic pole moved .
The north magnetic pole stood still and the continents moved .
Geologists noted that for rocks of the same age but on different continents , the little magnets pointed to different magnetic north poles .
Now look again at the three possible explanations .
If the continents had remained fixed while the north magnetic pole moved , there must have been two separate north poles .
The only reasonable explanation is that the magnetic north pole has remained fixed but that the continents have moved .
To test the idea that the pole remained fixed but the continents moved , geologists fitted the continents together as Wegener had done .
The two paths merge into one if the continents are allowed to drift .
This evidence for continental drift gave geologists renewed interest in understanding how continents could move about on the planets surface .
Topographic maps represent the locations of geographical features , such as hills and valleys .
Topographic maps use contour lines to show different elevations .
Scales indicate horizontal distance and are also found on the map legend .
Old Faithful erupting , Yellowstone Na - tional Park .
Hills , forests , development , and trees are all seen around Old Faithful .
Topographic maps are also called contour maps .
The rules of topographic maps are : Each line connects all points of a specific elevation .
Contour lines never cross since a single point can only have one elevation .
The difference in elevation is the contour interval , which is indicated in the map legend .
A bathymetric map is like a topographic map with the contour lines representing depth below sea level , rather than height above .
Numbers are low near sea level and become higher with depth .
Kilauea is the youngest volcano found above sea level in Hawaii .
On the flank of Kilauea is an even younger volcano called Loihi .
The bathymetric map pictured in the Figure 1.2 shows the form of Loihi .
Loihi volcano growing on the flank of Kilauea volcano in Hawaii .
Black lines in the inset show the land surface above sea level and blue lines show the topography below sea level .
A geologic map shows the geological features of a region -LRB- see Figure 1.3 for an example -RRB- .
Rock units are color - coded and identified in a key .
Faults and folds are also shown on geologic maps .
The geology is superimposed on a topographic map to give a more complete view of the geology of the region .
Mars is smaller , colder , drier , and appears to have no life , but volcanoes are common to both planets and Mars has many .
Mars is easy to observe , so Mars has been studied more thoroughly than any other extraterrestrial planet .
Space probes , rovers , and orbiting satellites have all yielded information to planetary geologists .
Although no humans have ever set foot on Mars , both NASA and the European Space Agency have set goals of sending people to Mars sometime between 2030 and 2040 .
This image of Mars , taken by the Hubble Space Telescope in October , 2005 , shows the planets red color , a small ice cap on the south pole , and a dust storm .
Viewed from Earth , Mars is reddish in color .
The ancient Greeks and Romans named the planet after the god of war .
Although the atmosphere is made up mostly of carbon dioxide , the planet has only a weak greenhouse effect , so temperatures are only slightly higher than if the planet had no atmosphere .
Olympus Mons is a shield volcano , similar to the volcanoes that make up the Hawaiian Islands .
It was previously believed that water can not stay in liquid form on Mars because the atmospheric pressure is too low .
Scientists think that water once flowed over the Martian surface because there are surface features that look like water-eroded canyons .
The presence of water on Mars suggests that it might have been possible for life to exist on Mars in the past .
Scientists also think Olympus Mons is about 27 km -LRB- 16.7 miles/88 ,580 ft -RRB- above the Martian sur - face , more than three times taller than Mount Everest .
This ice can melt when volcanoes erupt , and water can flow across the surface .
In late 2015 , NASA confirmed the presence of water on Mars .
Phobos and Deimos are named after characters in Greek mythology the two sons of Ares , who followed their father into war .
Mars has two small moons , Phobos -LRB- left -RRB- and Deimos -LRB- right -RRB- .
Both were discovered in 1877 and are thought to be captured asteroids .
A seismograph produces a graph-like representation of the seismic waves it receives and records them onto a seismogram -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Seismograms contain information that can be used to determine how strong an earthquake was , how long it lasted , and how far away it was .
Modern seismometers record ground motions using electronic motion detectors .
The data are then kept digitally on a computer .
The amplitude of the waves can be used to determine the magnitude of the earthquake , which will be discussed in a later section .
The seismogram in the introduction shows : foreshocks .
the arrival of the surface waves -LRB- very hard to pick out -RRB- .
These seismograms show the arrival of P - waves and S-waves .
The surface waves arrive just after the S-waves and are diffi - cult to distinguish .
Time is indicated on the horizontal portion -LRB- or x-axis -RRB- of the graph .
Mechanical weathering -LRB- also called physical weathering -RRB- breaks rock into smaller pieces .
That means the rock has changed physically without changing its composition .
There are many ways that rocks can be broken apart into smaller pieces .
Ice wedging is the main form of mechanical weathering in any climate that regularly cycles above and below the freezing point -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Ice wedging works quickly , breaking apart rocks in areas with temperatures that cycle above and below freezing in the day and night , and also that cycle above and below freezing with the seasons .
Ice wedging breaks apart so much rock that large piles of broken rock are seen at the base of a hillside , as rock fragments separate and tumble down .
Gravity causes abrasion as a rock tumbles down a mountainside or cliff .
Moving water causes abrasion as particles in the water collide and bump against one another .
Strong winds carrying pieces of sand can sandblast surfaces .
Ice in glaciers carries many bits and pieces of rock .
Abrasion makes rocks with sharp or jagged edges smooth and round .
This could happen slowly as a plants roots grow into a crack or fracture in rock and gradually grow larger , wedging open the crack .
Burrowing animals can also break apart rock as they dig for food or to make living spaces for themselves .
Human activities are responsible for enormous amounts of mechanical weathering , by digging or blasting into rock to build homes , roads , and subways , or to quarry stone .
Also , with very little atmosphere , the processes of weathering and erosion do not wear down structures on the planet .
However , the Mariner 10 spacecraft , shown in Figure 1.1 , visited Mercury from 1974 to 1975 .
The MESSENGER spacecraft has been studying Mercury in detail since 2005 .
The craft is currently in orbit around the planet , where it is creating detailed maps .
MESSENGER stands for Mercury Surface , Space Environment , Geochemistry and Ranging .
-LRB- a -RRB- Mariner 10 made three flybys of Mercury in 1974 and 1975 .
-LRB- b -RRB- A 2008 image of compiled from a flyby by MESSENGER .
As Figure 1.2 shows , the surface of Mercury is covered with craters , like Earths Moon .
Ancient impact craters means that for billions of years Mercury hasnt changed much geologically .
Mercury is named for the Roman messenger god , who could run extremely quickly , just as the planet moves very quickly in its orbit around the Sun .
A year on Mercury the length of time it takes to orbit the Sun is just 88 Earth days .
A day is defined as the time it takes a planet to turn on its axis .
Mercury is close to the Sun , so it can get very hot .
However , Mercury has virtually no atmosphere , no water to insulate the surface , and it rotates very slowly .
For these reasons , temperatures on the surface of Mercury vary widely .
Although most of Mercury is extremely dry , scientists think Mercury is covered with craters , like Earths Moon .
MESSENGER has taken extremely detailed pictures of the planets surface .
there may be a small amount of water in the form of ice at the poles of Mercury , in areas that never receive direct sunlight .
Figure 1.3 shows a diagram of Mercurys interior .
Its relatively large , liquid core , made mostly of melted iron , takes up about 42 % of the planets volume .
Mercury is released into the atmosphere when coal is burned -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
In the atmosphere , the mercury forms small droplets that are deposited in water or sediments .
Do you know why you are supposed to eat large predatory fish like tuna infrequently ?
A small fish that eats bacteria and plankton accumulates all of the mercury from all of the tiny creatures it eats over its lifetime .
A big fish accumulates all of the mercury from all of the small fish it eats over its lifetime .
The red region shows the effect of industrial - ization on atmospheric mercury .
So tuna pose a health hazard to anything that eats them because their bodies are so high in mercury .
This is why the government recommends limits on the amount of tuna that people eat .
If the mercury just stayed in a persons fat , it would not be harmful , but that fat is used when a woman is pregnant or nursing a baby .
A person will also get the mercury into her system when she -LRB- or he -RRB- burns the fat while losing weight .
Some pollutants remain in an organism throughout its life , a phenomenon called bioaccumulation .
In this process , an organism accumulates the entire amount of a toxic compound that it consumes over its lifetime .
Aspirin does not bioaccumulate ; if it did , a person would quickly accumulate a toxic amount in her body .
Compounds that bioaccumulate are usually stored in the organisms fat .
In the sediments , bacteria convert the droplets to the hazardous compound methyl mercury .
Bacteria and plankton store all of the mercury from all of the seawater they ingest -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Methyl mercury poisoning can cause nervous system or brain damage , especially in infants and children .
Children may experience brain damage or developmental delays .
The phrase mad as a hatter was common when Lewis Carroll wrote his Alice in Wonderland stories .
It was based on symptoms suffered by hatters who were exposed to mercury and experienced mercury poisoning while using the metal to make hats -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Mercury , a potent neurotoxin , has been flowing into the San Francisco Bay since the Gold Rush Era .
Now a multi-billion-dollar plan aims to clean it up .
A person traveling through the mesosphere would experience severe burns from ultraviolet light since the ozone layer , which provides UV protection , is in the stratosphere below .
Table 1.1 shows some common metamorphic rocks and their original parent rock .
Picture Rock Name Slate Type of Rock Foliated Metamorphic Comments Phyllite Foliated Metamorphism of slate , but under greater heat and pressure than slate Schist Foliated Often derived from meta - morphism of claystone or shale ; metamorphosed under more heat and pres - sure than phyllite Gneiss Foliated Metamorphism of various different rocks , under ex - treme conditions of heat and pressure Hornfels Non-foliated Contact metamorphism of various different rock types Metamorphism of shale Picture Rock Name Comments Quartzite Type of Metamorphic Rock Non-foliated Marble Non-foliated Metamorphism of lime - stone Metaconglomerate Non-foliated Metamorphism of con - glomerate Metamorphism of quartz sandstone Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Any type of rock - igneous , sedimentary , or metamorphic can become a metamorphic rock .
All that is needed is enough heat and/or pressure to alter the existing rocks physical or chemical makeup without melting the rock entirely .
Rocks change during metamorphism because the minerals need to be stable under the new temperature and pressure conditions .
The need for stability may cause the structure of minerals to rearrange and form new minerals .
Ions may move between minerals to create minerals of different chemical composition .
Hornfels , with its alternating bands of dark and light crystals , is a good example of how minerals rearrange themselves during metamorphism .
Hornfels is shown in the table for the `` Metamorphic Rock Classification '' concept .
Extreme pressure may also lead to foliation , the flat layers that form in rocks as the rocks are squeezed by pressure -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Foliation normally forms when pressure is exerted in only one direction .
Quartzite and marble , shown in the concept `` Metamorphic Rock Classification , '' are non-foliated .
Regional metamorphism : Changes in enormous quantities of rock over a wide area caused by the extreme pressure from overlying rock or from compression caused by geologic processes .
Deep burial exposes the rock to high temperatures .
The changes occur because of the magmas extreme heat .
People call them shooting stars but they are actually small pieces of matter burning up as they enter Earths atmosphere from space .
Meteors are called meteoroids before they reach Earths atmosphere .
Still smaller objects are called interplanetary dust .
When Earth passes through a cluster of meteoroids , there is a meteor shower .
These clusters are often remnants left behind by comet tails .
Although most meteors burn up in the atmosphere , larger meteoroids may strike the Earths surface to create a meteorite .
Meteorites are valuable to scientists because they provide clues about our solar system .
Many meteorites are from asteroids that formed when the solar system formed -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
A few meteorites are made of rocky material that is thought to have come from Mars when an asteroid impact shot material off the Martian surface and into space .
Astronomers estimate that the Milky Way contains 200 to 400 billion stars .
Although it is difficult to know what the shape of the Milky Way Galaxy is because we are inside of it , astronomers have identified it as a typical spiral galaxy containing about 200 billion to 400 billion stars -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
An artists rendition of what astronomers think the Milky Way Galaxy would look like seen from above .
The velocities of stars and gas in the galaxy show a rotational motion .
The central bulge contains mostly older stars and globular clusters .
Some recent evidence suggests the bulge might not be spherical , but is instead shaped like a bar .
The disk and bulge are surrounded by a faint , spherical halo , which also contains old stars and globular clusters .
Astronomers have discovered that there is a gigantic black hole at the center of the galaxy .
If our solar system were the size of your fist , the Galaxys disk would still be An infrared image of the Milky Way shows the long thin line of stars and the central bulge typical of spiral galaxies .
What evidence do astronomers find that lets them know that the Milky Way is a spiral galaxy ?
Our solar system , including the Sun , Earth , and all the other planets , is within one of the spiral arms in the disk of the Milky Way Galaxy .
Most of the stars we see in the sky are relatively nearby stars that are also in this spiral arm .
URL : The Universe contains many billions of stars and there are many billions of galaxies .
Just as Earth orbits the Sun , the Sun and solar system orbit the center of the Galaxy .
Astronomers have recently discovered that at the center of the Milky Way , and most other galaxies , is a supermassive black hole , although a black hole can not be seen .
This video describes the solar system in which we live .
The Moon is Earths only natural satellite , a body that moves around a larger body in space .
The Moon orbits Earth for the same reason Earth orbits the Sun gravity .
-LRB- a -RRB- The near side of the Moon faces Earth continually .
-LRB- b -RRB- The far side of the Moon has only been seen by spacecraft .
The Moon makes one complete orbit around the Earth every 27.3 days .
The Moon also rotates on its axis once every 27.3 days .
The same side of the Moon always faces Earth , so that side of the Moon is what we always see in the night sky -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The Moon makes no light of its own , but instead only reflects light from the Sun .
Since an atmosphere moderates temperature , the Moons average surface temperature during the day is approximately 225 F , but drops to -243 F at night .
Lunar surface features include the bowl-shaped craters that are caused by meteorite impacts -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
If Earth did not have plate tectonics or erosion , its surface would also be covered with meteorite craters .
The dark areas are called maria , which means seas because thats what the ancients thought they were .
From about 3.0 to 3.5 billion years ago the Moon was continually bombarded by meteorites .
Some of these meteorites were so large that they broke through the Moons newly formed surface .
Then , magma flowed out and filled the craters .
Scientists estimate this meteorite-caused volcanic activity on the Moon ceased about 1.2 billion years ago , but most occurred long before that .
The coldest temperatures , around -397 F , occur in craters in the permanently shaded south polar basin .
The terrae are the light silicate minerals that precipitated out of the ancient magma ocean and formed the early lunar crust .
There are no lakes , rivers , or even small puddles anywhere to be found on the Moons surface , but water in the form of ice has been found in the extremely cold craters and bound up in the lunar soil .
Life from Earth has visited the Moon and there are footprints of astronauts on the lunar surface .
With no wind , rain , or living thing to disturb them , these footprints will remain as long as the Moon exists .
These are among the coldest temperatures recorded in the entire solar system .
This landscape is always changing as plate tectonics builds new features and weathering and erosion destroys them .
With no atmosphere , features are not destroyed .
What is known about the Moons interior was determined from the analysis of rock samples gathered by astronauts and from unmanned spacecraft sent to the Moon -LRB- Figure The Moons small core , 600 to 800 kilometers in diameter , is mostly iron with some sulfur and nickel .
The mantle is composed of the minerals olivine and orthopyroxene .
Analysis of Moon rocks indicates that there may also be high levels of iron and titanium in the lunar mantle .
A close-up of the Moon , showing maria -LRB- the dark areas -RRB- and terrae -LRB- the light areas -RRB- ; maria covers around 16 % of the Moons surface , mostly on the side of the Moon we see .
LCROSS crashed into the Moon in May 2009 .
This QUEST video describes the mission .
Natural gas , often known simply as gas , is composed mostly of the hydrocarbon methane .
The amount of natural gas being extracted and used in the Untied States is increasing rapidly .
Natural gas forms under the same conditions that create oil .
Organic material buried in the sediments harden to become a shale formation that is the source of the gas .
Although natural gas forms at higher temperatures than crude oil , the two are often found together .
California also has natural gas , found mostly in the Central Valley .
In the northern Sacramento Valley and the Sacramento Delta , a sediment-filled trough formed along a location where crust was pushed together -LRB- an ancient convergent margin -RRB- .
Like crude oil , natural gas must be processed before it can be used as a fuel .
Other chemicals , such as water , make the gas less useful as a fuel .
Processing natural gas removes almost everything except the methane .
Natural gas is delivered to homes for uses such as cooking and heating .
Like coal and oil , natural gas is also burned to generate heat for powering turbines .
Natural gas burns much cleaner than other fossil fuels , meaning that it causes less air pollution .
Natural gas also produces less carbon dioxide than other fossil fuels do for the same amount of energy , so its global warming effects are less -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
One technique used is hydraulic fractur - ing , also called fracking , which increases the rate of recovery of natural gas .
Fluids are pumped through a borehole to create fractures in the reservoir rock that contains the natural gas .
Material is added to the fluid to prevent the fractures from closing .
Chemicals that have been found in the fluids may be carcinogens -LRB- cancer-causing -RRB- , radioactive materials , or endocrine disruptors , which interrupt hormones in the bodies of humans and animals .
The fluids may get into groundwater or may runoff into streams and other surface waters .
As noted above , fracking may cause earthquakes .
So that people in developed nations maintain a good lifestyle and people in developing nations have the ability to improve their lifestyles , natural resources must be conserved and protected -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
People are researching ways to find renewable alternatives to non-renewable resources .
Conserve energy at home -LRB- turn out lights when they are not needed -RRB- .
Purchase products made from recycled materials .
Reduce pollution so that resources are maintained .
Plant new trees to replace those that are cut down .
Neptune , shown in Figure 1.1 , is the only major planet that cant be seen from Earth without a telescope .
Scientists predicted the existence of Neptune before it was discovered because Uranus did not always appear exactly where it should appear .
They knew that the gravitational pull of another planet beyond Uranus must be affecting Uranus orbit .
Neptune was discovered in 1846 , in the position that had been predicted , and it was named Neptune for the Roman god of the sea because of its bluish color .
This image of Neptune was taken by Voy - ager 2 in 1989 .
The Great Dark Spot seen on the left center in the picture has since disappeared , but a similar dark spot has appeared on another part of the planet .
The planets slow orbit means that it takes 165 Earth years to go once around the Sun .
When Voyager 2 visited Neptune in 1986 , there was a large dark-blue spot , which scientists named the Great Dark Spot , south of the equator .
Neptunes composition is that of a gas giant : -LRB- 1 -RRB- upper atmosphere , -LRB- 2 -RRB- atmo - sphere composed of hydrogen , helium and methane gas , -LRB- 3 -RRB- mantle of water , ammonia and methane ice , -LRB- 4 -RRB- core of rock and ice .
When the Hubble Space Telescope took pictures of Neptune in 1994 , the Great Dark Spot had disappeared , but another dark spot had appeared north of the equator .
Astronomers think that both of these spots represent gaps in the methane clouds on Neptune .
The changing appearance of Neptune is caused by its turbulent atmosphere .
The winds on Neptune are stronger than on any other planet in the solar system , reaching speeds of 1,100 km/h -LRB- 700 mi/h -RRB- , close to the speed of sound .
This extreme weather surprised astronomers , since the planet receives little energy from the Sun to power weather systems .
Neptunes core is 7000 C -LRB- 12,632 C -RRB- which means that it produces more energy than it receives from the Sun .
Neptune has faint rings of ice and dust that may change or disappear in fairly short time frames .
Triton , shown in Figure 1.3 , is the only one of them that has enough mass to be spherical in shape .
Triton orbits in the direction opposite to the orbit of Neptune .
Scientists think Triton did not form around Neptune , but instead was captured by Neptunes gravity as it passed by .
Chlorophyll molecules , essential for photosynthesis , contain nitrogen .
Although nitrogen is the most abundant gas in the atmosphere , it is not in a form that plants can use .
To be useful , nitrogen must be fixed , or converted into a more useful form .
Although some nitrogen is fixed by lightning or blue-green algae , much is modified by bacteria in the soil .
These bacteria combine the nitrogen with oxygen or hydrogen to create nitrates or ammonia -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
-LRB- a -RRB- Nucleic acids contain nitrogen -LRB- b -RRB- Chlorophyll molecules contain nitrogen
Animals eat plant tissue and create animal tissue .
After a plant or animal dies or an animal excretes waste , bacteria and some fungi in the soil fix the organic nitrogen and return it to the soil as ammonia .
Nitrifying bacteria oxidize the ammonia to nitrites , while other bacteria oxidize the nitrites to nitrates , which can be used by the next generation of plants .
In this way , nitrogen does not need to return to a gas .
Under conditions when there is no oxygen , some bacteria can reduce nitrates to molecular nitrogen .
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and can not be replaced as quickly as they are used up .
A natural resource is anything people can use that comes from nature .
Energy resources are some of the most important natural resources because everything we do requires energy .
Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels such as oil and the radioactive element uranium .
Fossil fuels are mixtures of hydrocarbons -LRB- compounds containing only hydrogen and carbon -RRB- that formed over millions of years from the remains of dead organisms .
Fossil fuels provide most of the energy used in the world today .
They are burned in power plants to produce electrical energy , and they also fuel cars , heat homes , and supply energy for many other purposes .
A : Fossil fuels contain stored chemical energy that came originally from the sun .
When ancient plants underwent photosynthesis , they changed energy in sunlight to stored chemical energy in food .
The plants used the food and so did the organisms that ate the plants .
After the plants and other organisms died , their remains gradually changed to fossil fuels as they were covered and compressed by layers of sediments .
Petroleum and natural gas formed from ocean organisms and are found together .
Coal formed from giant tree ferns and other swamp plants .
The thermal energy can be used to generate electricity or do other work .
Q : Some newer models of cars and other motor vehicles can run on natural gas .
Why would a natural gas vehicle be better for the environment than a vehicle that burns gasoline , which is made from oil ?
A : Natural gas produces much less pollution and carbon dioxide when it burns than gasoline does .
So a natural gas vehicle would contribute less to global climate change , acid rain , and air pollution that harms health .
Besides being better for the environment , burning natural gas instead of gasoline results in less engine wear and provides more energy for a given amount of fuel .
The carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere and is a major cause of global climate change .
The burning of fossil fuels also releases many pollutants into the air .
Pollutants such as sulfur dioxide form acid rain , which kills living things and damages metals , stonework , and other materials .
Pollutants such as nitrogen oxides cause smog , which is harmful to human health .
Tiny particles , or particulates , released when fossil fuels burn also harm human health .
The Figure 1.2 shows the amounts of pollutants released by different fossil fuels .
Natural gas releases the least pollution ; coal releases the most .
Nuclear power plants , such as the one seen in Figure 1.2 , use uranium , which is mined , processed , and then concentrated into fuel rods .
When the uranium atoms in the fuel rods are hit by other extremely tiny particles , they split apart .
The number of tiny particles allowed to hit the fuel rods needs to be controlled , or they would cause a dangerous explosion .
The energy from a nuclear power plant heats water , which creates steam and causes a turbine to spin .
The spinning turbine turns a generator , which in turn produces electricity .
But the 2011 disaster at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in Japan may have resulted in a new fear of nuclear power .
The plant is scheduled for a complete cold shutdown before the end of 2011 .
Damaged building near the site of the Chernobyl disaster .
However , the use of nuclear energy does create other environ - mental problems .
The process of splitting atoms creates radioactive waste , which remains dangerous for thousands or hundreds of thousands of years .
Accidents at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl , Ukraine verified peoples worst fears about the dangers of harnessing nuclear power -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Recently , nuclear power appeared to be making a comeback as society looked for alternatives to fossil fuels .
After all , nuclear power emits no pollutants , including no greenhouse gases .
Net energy is the amount of useable energy available from a resource after subtracting the amount of energy needed to make the energy from that resource available .
The energy cost of an energy resource increases when the easy deposits of that resource have already been consumed .
For example , if all the nearshore petroleum in a region has been extracted , more costly drilling must take place further offshore -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Offshore drilling is taking place in deeper water than before .
The net-energy ratio demonstrates the difference between the amount of energy available in a resource and the amount of energy used to get it .
What does this suggest about using coal to generate electricity ?
The efficiency is greater in areas where the coal is locally mined and does not have to be transported great distances -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Obtaining coal for energy takes a lot of energy .
Because so much of the energy we use is from fossil fuels , we need to be especially concerned about using them efficiently .
Sometimes our choices affect energy efficiency .
A net-energy ratio larger than 1 means that there is a net gain in usable energy ; a net-energy ratio smaller than one means there is an overall energy loss .
Table 1.1 shows the net-energy ratios for some common energy sources .
Sunshine is abundant and does not need to be found , extracted , or transported very far .
Conditions in the intertidal zone change rapidly as water covers and uncovers the region and waves pound on the rocks .
A great abundance of life is found in the intertidal zone -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
High energy waves hit the organisms that live in this zone , so they must be adapted to pounding waves and exposure to air during low tides .
Hard shells protect from waves and also protect against drying out when the animal is above water .
Strong attachments keep the animals anchored to the rock .
The mussels on the top left have hard shells for protection and to prevent drying because they are often not covered by water .
The sea anemones in the lower right are more often submerged and have strong attachments but can close during low tides .
Many young organisms get their start in estuaries and so they must be adapted to rapid shifts in salinity .
Organisms in a tide pool include sea stars and sea urchins .
Corals and other animals deposit calcium carbonate to create rock reefs near the shore .
Reefs can form interesting shapes in the oceans .
If these volcanoes rise above sea level to become islands , and if they occur in tropical waters , coral reefs will form on them .
As the volcano comes off the hot spot , the crust cools .
The volcano subsides and then begins to erode away -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Eventually , all that is left is a reef island called an atoll .
A lagoon is found inside the reef .
Food either washes down from the land or is created by photosynthesizing plankton .
In this image of Maupiti Island in the South Pacific , the remnants of the volcano are surrounded by the circular reef .
An 1896 drawing of a deep sea angler fish with a bioluminescent lure to attract prey .
Zooplankton and larger animals feed on the phytoplankton and on each other .
Larger animals such as whales and giant groupers may live their entire lives in the open water .
How do fish survive in the deepest ocean ?
The few species that live in the greatest depths are very specialized -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Since its rare to find a meal , the fish use very little energy ; they move very little , breathe slowly , have minimal bone structure and a slow metabolism .
To maximize the chance of getting a meal , some species may have jaws that unhinge to accept a larger fish or backward-folding teeth to keep prey from escaping .
At mid-ocean ridges at hydrothermal vents , bacteria that use chemosyn - thesis for food energy are the base of a unique ecosystem -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
Shrimp , clams , fish , and giant tube worms have been found in these extreme places .
Giant tube worms found at hydrothermal vents get food from the chemosynthetic bacteria that live within them .
The bacte - ria provide food ; the worms provide shel - ter .
A video explaining hydrothermal vents with good footage is seen here :
Trash from land may end up as trash in the ocean , sometimes extremely far from land .
Some of it will eventually wash ashore , possibly far from where it originated -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Although people had once thought that the trash found everywhere at sea was from ships , it turns out that 80 % is from land .
Some of that is from runoff , some is blown from nearshore landfills , and some is dumped directly into the sea .
The 20 % that comes from ships at sea includes trash thrown overboard by large cruise ships and many other vessels .
Ghost nets , nets abandoned by fishermen intentionally or not , float the seas and entangle animals so that they can not escape .
Containers sometimes go overboard in storms .
Some noteworthy events , like a container of rubber ducks that entered the sea in 1992 , are used to better understand ocean currents .
The ducks went everywhere !
About 80 % of the trash that ends up in the oceans is plastic .
This is because a large amount of the trash produced since World War II is plastic .
While many types of plastic photodegrade that is , they break up in sunlight this process only works when the plastics are dry .
Plastic trash in the water does break down into smaller pieces , eventually becoming molecule-sized polymers .
Other trash in the oceans includes chemical sludge and materials that do biodegrade , like wood .
Some plastics contain toxic chemicals , such as bisphenol A.
Plastics can also absorb organic pollutants that may be floating in the water , such as the pesticide DDT -LRB- which is banned in the U.S. but not in other nations -RRB- and some endocrine disruptors .
Trash from the lands all around the North Pacific is caught up in currents .
The currents bring the trash into the center of the North Pacific Gyre .
Scientists estimate that it takes about six years for trash to move from west coast of North America to the center of the gyre .
This albatross likely died from the plastic it had ingested .
The size of the garbage patch is unknown , since it cant be seen from above .
Marine birds , such as albatross , or animals like sea turtles , live most of their lives at sea and just come ashore to mate .
These organisms cant break down the plastic and they may eventually die -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Fish may eat organisms that have eaten plastic and then be eaten by people .
This also exposes humans to toxic chemicals that the fish may have ingested with the plastic .
Plastic waste is estimated to kill 100,000 sea turtles and marine mammals annually , but exact numbers are unknown .
If an organism accidentally ingests one , it may clog digestion and cause starvation by stopping food from moving through or making the animal not feel hungry .
This means that filter feeders are ingesting a lot of plastics .
This may kill the organisms or the plastics may remain in their bodies .
They are then eaten by larger organisms that store the plastics and may eventually die .
Oceanographers divide the ocean into zones both vertically and horizontally .
To better understand regions of the ocean , scientists define the water column by depth .
The three major factors that make the deep ocean hard to inhabit are the absence of light , low temperature , and extremely high pressure .
Large lakes are divided into similar regions .
Sunlight only penetrates the sea surface to a depth of about 200 m , creating the photic zone -LRB- `` photic '' means light -RRB- .
Since tiny photosynthetic organisms , known as phytoplankton , supply nearly all of the energy and nutrients to the rest of the marine food web , most other marine organisms live in or at least visit the photic zone .
The aphotic zone makes up the majority of the ocean , but has a relatively small amount of its life , both in diversity of type and in numbers .
The aphotic zone is subdivided based on depth -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The seabed is divided into the zones described above , but ocean itself is also divided horizontally by distance from the shore .
Nearest to the shore lies the intertidal zone -LRB- also called the littoral zone -RRB- , the region between the high and low tidal marks .
The land is sometimes under water and sometimes exposed .
Some sunlight penetrates to the seabed here .
The oceanic zone is the entire rest of the ocean from the bottom edge of the neritic zone , where sunlight does not reach the bottom .
The sea bed and water column are subdivided further , as seen in the Figure 1.1 .
Large oil spills , like the Exxon Valdez in Alaska in 1989 , get a lot of attention , as they should .
Besides these large spills , though , much more oil enters the oceans from small leaks that are only a problem locally .
New drilling techniques have allowed oil companies to drill in deeper waters than ever before .
This allows us to access oil deposits that were never before accessible , but only with great technological difficulty .
The risks from deepwater drilling and the consequences when something goes wrong are greater than those associated with shallower wells .
Workers are exposed to harsh ocean conditions and gas explosions .
The danger was never more obvious than on April 20 , 2010 , when 11 workers were killed and 17 injured in an explosion on a deepwater oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The drilling rig , operated by BP , was 77 km -LRB- 48 miles -RRB- offshore and the depth to the well was more than 5,000 feet .
The U.S. Coast Guard tries to put out the fire and search for missing workers after the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig .
Two days after the explosion , the drill rig sank .
The 5,000-foot pipe that connected the wellhead to the drilling platform bent .
Oil was free to gush into the Gulf of Mexico from nearly a mile deep -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Initial efforts to cap or contain the spill at or near its source all failed to stop the vast oil spill .
It was not until July 15 , nearly three months after the accident , that the well was successfully capped .
The U.S. government estimates that about 4.9 million barrels entered the Gulf at a rate of 35,000 to 60,000 barrels a day .
Removal : Oil is corralled and then burned ; natural gas is flared off -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
The government estimates for total oil leaked by this date was 3,200,000 barrels .
Dispersal : Oil disperses naturally over time because it mixes with the water .
However , such large amounts of oil will take decades to disperse .
To speed the process up , BP has sprayed unprecedented amounts of chemical dispersants on the spill .
That action did not receive support from the scientific community since no one knows the risks to people and the environment from such a large amount of these harmful chemicals .
Some workers may have become ill from exposure to the chemicals .
Machines that can separate oil from the water are placed aboard ships stationed in the area .
These ships cleaned tens of thousands of barrels of contaminated seawater each day .
Containment : Floating containment booms are placed on the surface offshore of the most sensitive coastal areas in an attempt to attempt to trap the oil .
Sand berms have been constructed off of the Louisiana coast to keep the oil from reaching shore .
-LRB- a -RRB- On May 17 , 2010 , oil had been leaking into the Gulf for nearly one month .
On that date government estimates put the maximum total oil leak at 1,600,000 barrels , according to the New York Times .
BP drilled two relief wells into the original well .
When the relief wells entered the original borehole , specialized liquids were pumped into the original well to stop the flow .
The original well was declared effectively dead on September 19 , 2010 .
The economic and environmental impact of this spill will be felt for many years .
Many people rely on the Gulf for their livelihoods or for recreation .
Fearing contamination , NOAA imposed a fishing ban on approximately one-third of the Gulf -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
Tourism is down in the region as beach goers find other ways to spend their time .
Real estate prices along the Gulf have declined precipitously .
This was the extent of the banned area on June 21 , 2010 .
The Gulf of Mexico is one of only two places in the world where bluefin tuna spawn and they are also already endangered .
Marine mammals in the Gulf may come up into the slick as they come to the surface to breathe .
Eight national parks and seashores are found along the Gulf shores .
In October 2011 a report was issued that showed that whales and dolphins are dying in the Gulf at twice their normal rate .
The Green Revolution has brought enormous impacts to the planet .
Natural landscapes have been altered to create farmland and cities .
Already , half of the ice-free lands have been converted to human uses .
Forests and other landscapes have been cleared for farming or urban areas .
Rivers have been dammed and the water is transported by canals for irrigation and domestic uses .
Ecologically sensitive areas have been altered : wetlands are now drained and coastlines are developed .
Modern agricultural practices produce a lot of pollution -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Dead zones grow as fertilizers drain off farmland and introduce nutrients into lakes and coastal areas .
Farm machines and vehicles used to transport crops produce air pollutants .
Pollutants enter the air , water , or are spilled onto the land .
These needs are met to different degrees in different nations and among different socioeconomic classes of people .
For example , about 1.2 billion of the worlds people do not have enough clean water for drinking and washing each day -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The addition of more people has not just resulted in more poor people .
A large percentage of people expect much more than to have their basic needs met .
Comfortable temperatures are made possible by heating and cooling systems , rapid trans - portation is available by motor vehicles or a well-developed public transportation system , instant communication takes place by phones and email , and many other luxuries are available that were not even dreamed of only a few The percentage of people in the world that live in abject poverty is decreasing some - what globally , but increasing in some re - gions , such as Sub-Saharan Africa .
All of these require resources in order to be produced , and fossil fuels in order to be powered -LRB- Figure Many people refer to the abundance of luxury items in these peoples lives as over-consumption .
People in developed nations use 32 times more resources than people in the developing countries of the world .
Human-made chemicals are breaking ozone molecules in the ozone layer .
These processes convert UV radiation into heat , which is how the Sun heats the stratosphere .
-LRB- 3 -RRB- Under natural cir - cumstances , the amount of ozone cre - ated equals the amount destroyed .
When O3 interacts with chlorine or some other gases the O3 breaks down into O2 and O and so the ozone layer loses its ability to filter out UV .
the Suns warmth starts the air moving , and ultraviolet light breaks the CFCs apart .
The chlorine atom floats away and attaches to one of the oxygen atoms on an ozone molecule .
The chlorine pulls the oxygen atom away , leaving behind an O2 molecule , which provides no UV protection .
The chlorine then releases the oxygen atom and moves on to destroy another ozone molecule .
One CFC molecule can destroy as many as 100,000 ozone molecules .
PSCs form only where the stratosphere is coldest , and are most common above Antarctica in the wintertime .
PSCs are needed for stratospheric ozone to be de - stroyed .
CFCs were once widely used because they are cheap , nontoxic , nonflammable , and non-reactive .
They were used as spray-can propellants , refrigerants , and in many other products .
Once they are released into the air , CFCs float up to the stratosphere .
Ozone destruction creates the ozone hole where the layer is dangerously thin -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
As air circulates over Antarctica in the spring , the ozone hole expands northward over the southern continents , including Australia , New Zealand , southern South America , and southern Africa .
UV levels may rise as much as 20 % beneath the ozone hole .
The hole was first measured in 1981 when it was 2 million square km -LRB- 900,000 square miles -RRB- .
The 2006 hole was the largest ever observed at 28 million square km -LRB- 11.4 million square miles -RRB- .
The size of the ozone hole each year depends on many factors , including whether conditions are right for the formation of PSCs .
The September 2006 ozone hole , the largest observed -LRB- through 2013 -RRB- .
Blue and purple colors show particularly low levels of ozone .
Ozone loss also occurs over the North Polar Region , but it is not enough for scientists to call it a hole .
The region of low ozone levels is small because the atmosphere is not as cold and PSCs do not form as readily .
Ozone losses on human health and environment include : Increases in sunburns , cataracts -LRB- clouding of the lens of the eye -RRB- , and skin cancers .
A loss of ozone of only 1 % is estimated to increase skin cancer cases by 5 % to 6 % .
CFCs were banned in spray cans in some nations in 1978 .
The greatest production of CFCs was in 1986 , but it has declined since then .
This will be discussed more in the next concept .
Decreases in the human immune systems ability to fight off infectious diseases .
A decrease of 6 % to 12 % has been measured around Antarctica , which may be at least partly related to the ozone hole .
Whales in the Gulf of California have been found to have sunburned cells in their lowest skin layers , indicating very severe sunburns .
The problem is greatest with light colored species or species that spend more time near the sea surface .
When the problem with ozone depletion was recognized , world leaders took action .
Some of the most important events of the Paleozoic and Mesozoic were the rising and falling of sea level over the continents .
Sea level rises over the land during a marine transgression .
What could cause sea level to fall in a marine regression ?
Geologists think that the Paleozoic marine transgressions and regressions were the result of the decrease and increase in the size of glaciers covering the lands .
One of two things must happen for sea level to change in a marine transgression : either the land must sink or the water level must rise .
When little or no fresh water is tied up in glaciers and ice caps , sea level is high .
Sea level also appears to rise if land is down dropped .
Sea level rises if an increase in seafloor spreading rate buoys up the ocean crust , causing the ocean basin to become smaller .
Geologists know about marine transgressions and regressions from the sedimentary rock record .
These events leave characteristic rock layers known as sedimentary facies .
On a shoreline , sand and other coarse grained rock fragments are commonly found on the beach where the wave energy is high .
Away from the shore in lower energy environments , fine-grained silt that later creates shale is deposited .
In deeper , low-energy waters , carbonate mud that later hardens into limestone is deposited .
The Paleozoic sedimentary rocks of the Grand Canyon contain evidence of marine transgressions and regressions , but even there the rock record is not complete .
At the bottom , the Tonto Group represents a marine transgression : sandstone -LRB- 11 -RRB- , shale -LRB- 10 -RRB- , and limestone -LRB- 9 -RRB- laid down during 30 million years of the Cambrian Period .
Above that is freshwater limestone -LRB- 8 -RRB- , which is overlain by limestone -LRB- 7 -RRB- and then shale -LRB- 6 -RRB- , indicating that the sea was regressing .
After another unconformity , the rocks of the Supai Group -LRB- 5 -RRB- include limestone , siltstone , and sandstone indicative of a regressing sea .
Above those rocks are shale -LRB- 4 -RRB- , sandstone -LRB- 3 -RRB- , a limestone and sandstone mix -LRB- 2 -RRB- showing that the sea regressed and transgressed and finally limestone -LRB- 1 -RRB- indicating that the sea had come back in .
Compared with the long expanse of the Precambrian , the Phanerozoic is recent history .
Much more geological evidence is available for scientists to study so the Phanerozoic is much better known .
The Paleozoic begins and ends with a supercontinent .
At the beginning of the Paleozoic , the supercontinent Rodinia began to split up .
At the end , Pangaea came together .
A mountain-building event is called an orogeny .
Geologists think they may once have been higher than the Himalayas are now .
As continents smash into microcontinents and island arcs collided , mountains rise .
Geologists find evidence for the orogenies that took place while Pangaea was forming in many locations .
For example , Laurentia collided with the Taconic Island Arc during the Taconic Orogeny -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The remnants of this mountain range make up the Taconic Mountains in New York .
Laurentia experienced other orogenies as it merged with the northern continents .
The southern continents came together to form Gondwana .
When Laurentia and Gondwana collided to create Pangaea , the Appalachians rose .
Evidence for the existence of Pangaea was what Alfred Wegener used to create his continental drift hypothesis , which was described in the chapter Plate Tectonics .
As the continents move and the land masses change shape , the shape of the oceans changes too .
During the time of Pangaea , about 250 million years ago , most of Earths water was collected in a huge ocean called Panthalassa -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Oil is a liquid fossil fuel that is extremely useful because it can be transported easily and can be used in cars and other vehicles .
Oil from the ground is called crude oil , which is a mixture of many different hydrocarbons .
Oil also forms from buried dead organisms , but these are tiny organisms that live on the sea surface and then sink to the seafloor when they die .
The dead organisms are kept away from oxygen by layers of other dead creatures and sediments .
Over millions of years , the dead organisms turn into liquid oil .
Trapped above the porous rock layer and beneath the impermeable layer , the oil will remain between these layers until it is extracted from the rock .
Oil -LRB- red -RRB- is found in the porous rock layer -LRB- yellow -RRB- and trapped by the impermeable layer -LRB- brown -RRB- .
The folded structure has allowed the oil to pool so a well can be drilled into the reservoir .
To separate the different types of hydrocarbons in crude oil for different uses , the crude oil must be refined in refineries like the one shown in Figure 1.2 .
When the oil is boiled in the refinery , separate equipment collects the different compounds .
Most of the compounds that come out of the refining process are fuels , such as gasoline , diesel , and heating oil .
Because these fuels are rich sources of energy and can be easily transported , oil provides about 90 % of the energy used for transportation around the world .
The rest of the compounds from crude oil are used for waxes , plastics , fertilizers , and other products .
In a car engine , the burned gasoline mostly turns into carbon dioxide and water vapor .
The fuel releases most of its energy as heat , which causes the gases to expand .
This creates enough force to move the pistons inside the engine and to power the car .
The United States does produce oil , but the amount produced is only about one-quarter as much as the nation uses .
The United States has only about 1.5 % of the worlds proven oil reserves , so most of the oil used by Americans must be imported from other nations .
Figure 1.1 shows the relative sizes of the orbits of the planets , asteroid belt , and Kuiper belt .
The upper right shows the outer planets and the Kuiper belt .
While studying the solar system , Johannes Kepler discovered the relationship between the time it takes a planet to make one complete orbit around the Sun , its `` orbital period , '' and the distance from the Sun to the planet .
This is how astronomers without modern telescopes could determine the distances to other planets within the solar system .
Astronomers have discovered two more planets -LRB- Uranus and Neptune -RRB- , five dwarf planets -LRB- Ceres , Pluto , Makemake , Haumea , and Eris -RRB- , more than 150 moons , and many , many asteroids and other small objects .
Although the Sun is just an average star compared to other stars , it is by far the largest object in the solar system .
Table 1.1 gives data on the sizes of the Sun and planets relative to Earth .
One astronomical unit is defined as the distance from Earth to the Sun .
1 AU equals about 150 million km , or 93 million miles .
Table 1.2 shows the distances to the planets -LRB- the average radius of orbits -RRB- in AU .
The table also shows how long it takes each planet to spin on its axis -LRB- the length of a day -RRB- and how long it takes each planet to complete an orbit -LRB- the length of a year -RRB- ; in particular , notice how slowly Venus rotates relative to Earth .
Planet Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Average Distance from Sun -LRB- AU -RRB- 0.39 AU 0.72 1.00 1.52 5.20 9.54 19.22 30.06 Length of Day -LRB- In Earth Days -RRB- 56.84 days 243.02 1.00 1.03 0.41 0.43 0.72 0.67 Length of Year -LRB- In Earth Years -RRB- 0.24 years 0.62 1.00 1.88 11.86 29.46 84.01 164.8 Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Ponds are small bodies of fresh water that usually have no outlet ; ponds are often are fed by underground springs .
Like lakes , ponds are bordered by hills or low rises so the water is blocked from flowing directly downhill .
Lakes can also form in volcanic craters and impact craters .
-LRB- b -RRB- The Great Lakes fill depressions eroded as glaciers scraped rock out from the landscape .
-LRB- c -RRB- Lake Baikal , ice coated in winter in this image , formed as water filled up a tectonic faults .
Lakes near Yellowknife were carved by glaciers during the last Ice Age .
or if their outlets grow because of erosion .
When the climate of an area changes , lakes can either expand or shrink -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Lakes may disappear if precipitation significantly diminishes .
Large lakes have tidal systems and currents , and can even affect weather patterns .
The Great Lakes in the United States contain 22 % of the worlds fresh surface water -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The largest them , Lake Superior , has a tide that rises and falls several centimeters each day .
Water usually drains out of a lake through a river or a stream and all lakes lose water to evaporation .
The Great Lakes are large enough to alter the weather system in Northeastern United States by the lake effect , which is an increase in snow downwind of the relatively warm lakes .
People dam a stream in a suitable spot and then let the water back up behind it , creating a lake .
These lakes are called `` reservoirs . ''
Lakes form in a variety of different ways : in depressions carved by glaciers , in calderas -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , and along tectonic faults , to name a few .
Subglacial lakes are even found below a frozen ice cap .
In fact , more than 60 % of all the worlds lakes are in Canada most of these lakes were formed by the glaciers that covered most of Canada in the last Ice Age -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Some come and go with the seasons , as water levels rise and fall .
Over a longer time , lakes disappear when they fill with sediments , if the springs or streams that fill them diminish , -LRB- a -RRB- Crater Lake in Oregon is in a volcanic caldera .
Biotic and abiotic factors determine the population size of a species in an ecosystem .
A population can shrink either because of biotic or abiotic limits .
An increase in predators , the emergence of a new disease , or the loss of habitat are just three possible problems that will decrease a population .
A population may also shrink if it grows too large for the resources required to support it .
Biotic factors include the amount of food that is available to that species and the number of organisms that also use that food source .
Space , water , and climate all help determine a species population .
When does a population grow ?
A population grows when the number of births is greater than the number of deaths .
When deaths exceed births .
In a population at its carrying capacity , there are as many organisms of that species as the habitat can support .
If the factors become less plentiful , the carrying capacity drops .
If resources are being used faster than they are being replenished , then the species has exceeded its carrying capacity .
If this occurs , the population will then decrease in size .
A limiting factor determines the carrying capacity for a species .
But then your neighbor comes over with a dozen eggs .
If you get more butter , some other ingredient will be limiting .
Species ordinarily produce more offspring than their habitat can support -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
If conditions improve , more young survive and the population grows .
Those individuals that survive to fill the available spots in the niche are those that are the most fit for their habitat .
An animal produces many more offspring than will survive .
The size of a population is tied to its limiting factor .
What happens if a limiting factor increases a lot ?
If a limiting factor increases a lot , another factor will most likely become the new limiting factor .
The first crust was made of basaltic rock , like the current ocean crust .
Partial melting of the lower portion of the basaltic crust began more than 4 billion years ago .
This created the silica-rich crust that became the felsic continents .
The earliest felsic continental crust is now found in the ancient cores of continents , called the cratons .
Rapid plate motions meant that cratons experienced many continental collisions .
These ancient greenstones indicate the presence of subduction zones .
Ice age glaciers scraped the Canadian Shield down to the 4.28 billion year old greenstone in Northwestern Quebec .
Geologists can learn many things about the Pre-Archean by studying the rocks of the cratons .
Cratons also contain felsic igneous rocks , which are remnants of the first continents .
Cratonic rocks contain rounded sedimentary grains .
Rounded grains indicate that the minerals eroded from an earlier rock type and that rivers or seas also existed .
Since greenstones are found today in oceanic trenches , what does the presence of greenstones mean ?
Cratons date from the Precambrian and are called Precambrian shields .
The Canadian Shield is the ancient flat part of Canada that lies around Hudson Bay , the northern parts of Minnesota , Wisconsin and Michigan and much of Greenland .
In most places the cratons were covered by younger rocks , which together are called a platform .
Sometimes the younger rocks eroded away to expose the Precambrian craton -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Still , about half the internal heat that was generated when Earth formed remains in the planet and is the source of the heat in the core and mantle today .
Small Proterozoic continents known as microcontinents collided to create supercontinents , which resulted in the uplift of massive mountain ranges .
Seafloor spreading eventually started and created the oceans between the continents .
The breakup of Rodinia may have triggered Snowball Earth around 700 million years ago .
The history of the North American craton is an example of what generally happened to the cratons during the Precambrian .
As the craton drifted , it collided with microcontinents and oceanic island arcs , which were added to the continents .
These lands came together to create the continent of Laurentia .
About 1.1 billion years ago , Laurentia became part of the supercontinent Rodinia -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Rodinia probably contained all of the landmass at the time , which was about 75 % of the continental landmass present today .
Rodinia broke up about 750 million years ago .
The geological evidence for this breakup includes large lava flows that are found where continental rifting took place .
Nations that have more industry produce more hazardous waste .
Currently , the United States is the worlds largest producer of hazardous wastes , but China , which produces so many products for the developed world , may soon take over the number-one spot .
These materials must be disposed of using government guidelines and records must be kept to show the government that the wastes were disposed of safely .
Workers must be protected from the hazardous materials .
To some extent , individuals can control the production and disposal of hazardous wastes .
We can choose to use materials that are not hazardous , such as using vinegar as a cleanser .
At home , people can control the amount of pesticides that they use -LRB- or they can use organic methods of pest control -RRB- .
It is also necessary to dispose of hazardous materials properly by not pouring them over the land , down the drain or toilet , or into a sewer or trashcan .
Countries with more industry produce more hazardous wastes than those with little industry .
Problems with haz - ardous wastes and their disposal became obvious sooner in the developed world than in the developing world .
As mentioned in the `` Impacts of Hazardous Waste '' concept , the Superfund Act requires companies to clean up contaminated sites that are designated as Superfund sites -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
If a responsible party can not be identified , because the company has gone out of business or its culpability can not be proven , the federal government pays for the cleanup out of a trust fund with money put aside by the petroleum and chemical industries .
Superfund sites are located all over the nation and many are waiting to be cleaned up .
The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 requires that companies keep track of any hazardous materials they produce .
Sedimentary rocks follow certain rules .
This deformation produces geologic structures such as folds , joints , and faults that are caused by stresses .
Sediments are deposited horizontally , so sedimentary rock layers are originally horizontal , as are some vol - canic rocks , such as ash falls .
Since sedimentary rocks follow these rules , they are useful for seeing the effects of stress on rocks .
You can trace the deformation a rock has experienced by seeing how it differs from its original horizontal , oldest - on-bottom position .
Using the rules listed above , try to figure out the geologic history of the geologic column .
The ways geologists figure out the geological history of an area will be explored more in the chapter Earth History .
In the Grand Canyon , the rock layers are exposed like a layer cake .
Each layer is made of sediments that were deposited in a particular environment - perhaps a lake bed , shallow offshore region , or a sand dune .
-LRB- b -RRB- A geologic column showing the rocks of the Grand Canyon .
As a geology student you may ask : how did this rock form ?
If you poke at the rock and analyze its chemistry you will see that its made of sand .
In fact , the rock formation is called the Navajo sandstone .
It would be hard to design an experiment to show how this rock formed .
But we can make observations now and apply them to this rock that formed long ago .
James Hutton came up with this idea in the late 1700s .
It is that if we can understand a geological process now and we find evidence of that same Checkerboard Mesa in Zion National Park , Utah .
process in the past , then we can assume that the process operated the same way in the past .
Hutton speculated that it has taken millions of years to shape the planet , and it is continuing to be changed .
He said that there are slow , natural processes that changed , and continue to change , the planets landscape .
For example , given enough time , a stream could erode a valley , or sediment could accumulate and form a new landform .
What would cause sandstone to have layers that cross each other , a feature called cross-bedding ?
In the photo of the Mesquite sand dune in Death Valley National Park , California -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- , we see that wind can cause cross-bedding in sand .
There are also ripples caused by the wind waving over the surface of the dune .
Since we can observe wind forming sand dunes with these patterns now , we have a good explanation for how the Navajo sandstone formed .
The Navajo sandstone is a rock formed from ancient sand dunes in which wind direction changed from time to time .
This is just one example of how geologists use observations they make today to unravel what happened in Earths past .
Rocks formed from volcanoes , oceans , rivers , and many other features are deciphered by looking at the geological work those features do today .
Early geologists had no way to determine the absolute age of a geological material .
Using sensible principles they could say whether one rock was older than another and when a process occurred relative to those rocks .
Remember Nicholas Steno , who determined that fossils represented parts of once-living organisms ?
Steno also noticed that fossil seashells could be found in rocks and mountains far from any ocean .
Lateral continuity : Sediments are deposited in continuous sheets that span the body of water that they are deposited in .
When a valley cuts through sedimentary layers , it is assumed that the rocks on either side of the valley were originally continuous .
Superposition : Sedimentary rocks are deposited one on top of another .
The youngest layers are found at the top of the sequence , and the oldest layers are found at the bottom .
Steno proposed that if a rock contained the fossils of marine animals , the rock formed from sediments that were deposited on the seafloor .
These rocks were then uplifted to become mountains .
This scenario led him to develop the principles that are discussed below .
Stenos laws are illustrated in Figure 1.1 .
Original horizontality : Sediments are deposited in fairly flat , horizontal layers .
Other scientists observed rock layers and formulated other principles .
Geologist William Smith -LRB- 1769-1839 -RRB- identified the principle of faunal succession , which recognizes that : Some fossil types are never found with certain other fossil types -LRB- e.g.
human ancestors are never found with dinosaurs -RRB- meaning that fossils in a rock layer represent what lived during the period the rock was deposited .
Older features are replaced by more modern features in fossil organisms as species change through time ; e.g.
feathered dinosaurs precede birds in the fossil record .
Fossil species with features that change distinctly and quickly can be used to determine the age of rock layers quite precisely .
Scottish geologist , James Hutton -LRB- 1726-1797 -RRB- recognized the principle of cross-cutting relationships .
This helps geologists to determine the older and younger of two rock units -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
In this image , A must have existed first for B to cut across it .
The Grand Canyon provides an excellent illustration of the principles above .
The many horizontal layers of sedi - mentary rock illustrate the principle of original horizontality -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Distinctive rock layers , such as the Kaibab Limestone , are matched across the broad expanse of the canyon .
These rock layers were once connected , as stated by the rule of lateral continuity .
The Colorado River cuts through all the layers of rock to form the canyon .
Water inhabits reservoirs within the cycle , such as ponds , oceans , or the atmosphere .
The molecules move between these reservoirs by certain processes , including condensation and precipitation .
The following section looks at the reservoirs and the processes that move water between them .
The Sun , many millions of kilometers away , provides the energy that drives the water cycle .
Our nearest star directly impacts the water cycle by supplying the energy needed for evaporation .
Most of Earths water is stored in the oceans , where it can remain for hundreds or thousands of years .
Water changes from a liquid to a gas by evaporation to become water vapor .
The Suns energy can evaporate water from the ocean surface or from lakes , streams , or puddles on land .
Only the water molecules evaporate ; the salts remain in the ocean or a fresh water reservoir .
The water vapor remains in the atmosphere until it undergoes condensation to become tiny droplets of liquid .
The droplets gather in clouds , which are blown about the globe by wind .
As the water droplets in the clouds collide and grow , they fall from the sky as precipitation .
Sometimes precipitation falls back into the ocean and sometimes it falls onto the land surface .
When water falls from the sky as rain it may enter streams and rivers that flow downward to oceans and lakes .
Water that falls as snow may sit on a mountain for several months .
Snow may become part of the ice in a glacier , where it may remain for hundreds or thousands of years .
Snow and ice may go directly back into the air by sublimation , the process in which a solid changes directly into a gas without first becoming a liquid .
Although you probably have not seen water vapor undergoing sublimation from a glacier , you may have seen dry ice sublimate in air .
Snow and ice slowly melt over time to become liquid water , which provides a steady flow of fresh water to streams , rivers , and lakes below .
A water droplet falling as rain could also become part of a stream or a lake .
At the surface , the water may eventually evaporate and reenter the atmosphere .
Soil moisture is an important reservoir for water -LRB- Figure The moisture content of soil in the United States varies greatly .
Water may seep through dirt and rock below the soil and then through pores infiltrating the ground to go into Earths groundwater system .
Groundwater enters aquifers that may store fresh water for centuries .
Alternatively , the water may come to the surface through springs or find its way back to the oceans .
Plants and animals depend on water to live .
Plants take up water from the soil and release large amounts of water vapor into the air through their leaves -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- , a process known as transpiration .
People also depend on water as a natural resource .
Not content to get water directly from streams or ponds , humans create canals , aqueducts , dams , and wells to collect water and direct it to where they want it -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Clouds form above the Amazon Rainfor - est even in the dry season because of moisture from plant transpiration .
Pont du Gard in France is an ancient aqueduct and bridge that was part of of a well-developed system that supplied wa - ter around the Roman empire .
Water pollution can be reduced in two ways : Keep the water from becoming polluted .
Keeping water from becoming polluted often requires laws to be sure that people and companies behave responsibly .
In the United States , the Clean Water Act gives the Environmental Protection Agency -LRB- EPA -RRB- the authority to set standards for water quality for industry , agriculture , and domestic uses .
The law gives the EPA the authority to reduce the discharge of pollution into waterways , finance wastewater treatment plants , and manage runoff .
Since its passage in 1972 , more wastewater treatment plants have been constructed and the release of industrial waste into the water supply is better controlled .
Scientists control water pollution by sam - pling the water and studying the pollutants that are in the water .
The United Nations and other international groups are working to improve global water quality standards by pro- viding the technology for treating water .
These organizations also educate people in how to protect and improve the quality of the water they use -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The goal of water treatment is to make water suitable for such uses as drinking , medicine , agriculture , and industrial processes .
People living in developed countries suffer from few waterborne diseases and illness , because they have extensive water treatment systems to collect , treat , and redeliver clean water .
Wastewater contains hundreds of contaminants , such as suspended solids , oxygen-demanding materials , dissolved inorganic compounds , and harmful bacteria .
In a wastewater treatment plant , multiple processes must be used to produce usable water : Sewage treatment removes contaminants , such as solids and particles , from sewage .
Water purification produces drinking water by removing bacteria , algae , viruses , fungi , unpleasant elements such as iron and sulfur , and man-made chemical pollutants .
The treatment method used depends on the kind of wastewater being treated and the desired end result .
Wastewater is treated using a series of steps , each of which produces water with fewer contaminants .
What can individuals do to protect water quality ?
Find approved recycling or disposal facilities for motor oil and household chemicals .
Keep litter , pet waste , leaves , and grass clippings out of street gutters and storm drains .
Some isotopes are radioactive ; radioactive isotopes are unstable and spontaneously change by gaining or losing particles .
Two types of radioactive decay are relevant to dating Earth materials -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- : Particle Alpha Composition 2 protons , 2 neutrons Beta 1 electron Effect on Nucleus The nucleus contains two fewer protons and two fewer neutrons .
One neutron decays to form a pro- ton and an electron .
The radioactive decay of a parent isotope -LRB- the original element -RRB- leads to the formation of stable daughter product , also known as daughter isotope .
As time passes , the number of parent isotopes decreases and the number of daughter isotopes increases -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Radioactive materials decay at known rates , measured as a unit called half-life .
This is how the material decays over time -LRB- see Table 1.2 -RRB- .
of half lives passed 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Percent parent remaining 100 50 25 12.5 6.25 3.125 1.563 0.781 0.391 Percent daughter produced 0 50 75 87.5 93.75 96.875 98.437 99.219 99.609 Pretend you find a rock with 3.125 % parent atoms and 96.875 % daughter atoms .
The decay of radioactive materials can be shown with a graph -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Notice how it doesnt take too many half lives before there is very little parent remaining and most of the isotopes are daughter isotopes .
This limits how many half lives can pass before a radioactive element is no longer useful for Decay of an imaginary radioactive sub - stance with a half-life of one year .
Radiometric dating is the process of using the concentrations of radioactive substances and daughter products to estimate the age of a material .
Different isotopes are used to date materials of different ages .
Using more than one isotope helps scientists to check the accuracy of the ages that they calculate .
Radiocarbon dating is used to find the age of once-living materials between 100 and 50,000 years old .
This range is especially useful for determining ages of human fossils and habitation sites -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Carbon isotopes from the black material in these cave paintings places their cre - ating at about 26,000 to 27,000 years BP -LRB- before present -RRB- .
The atmosphere contains three isotopes of carbon : carbon-12 , carbon-13 and carbon-14 .
Plants remove all three isotopes of carbon from the atmosphere during photosynthesis .
Animals consume this carbon when they eat plants or other animals that have eaten plants .
After the organisms death , the carbon-14 decays to stable nitrogen-14 by releasing a beta particle .
The nitrogen atoms are lost to the atmosphere , but the amount of carbon-14 that has decayed can be estimated by measuring the proportion of radioactive carbon-14 to stable carbon - 12 .
As time passes , the amount of carbon-14 decreases relative to the amount of carbon-12 .
Potassium-40 decays to argon-40 with a half-life of 1.26 billion years .
Argon is a gas so it can escape from molten magma , meaning that any argon that is found in an igneous crystal probably formed as a result of the decay of potassium-40 .
Measuring the ratio of potassium-40 to argon-40 yields a good estimate of the age of that crystal .
With its half-life , the technique is used to date rocks from 100,000 years to over a billion years old .
The technique has been useful for dating fairly young geological materials and deposits containing the bones of human ancestors .
Two uranium isotopes are used for radiometric dating .
Uranium-238 decays to lead-206 with a half-life of 4.47 billion years .
Uranium-235 decays to form lead-207 with a half-life of 704 million years .
Uranium-lead dating is usually performed on zircon crystals -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
When zircon forms in an igneous rock , the crystals readily accept atoms of uranium but reject atoms of lead .
If any lead is found in a zircon crystal , it can be assumed that it was produced from the decay of uranium .
Uranium-lead dating is useful for dating igneous rocks from 1 million years to around 4.6 billion years old .
Ideally , different radiometric techniques are used to date the same sample ; if the calculated ages agree , they are thought to be accurate .
To estimate the age of a sedimentary rock , geologists find nearby igneous rocks that can be dated and use relative dating to constrain the age of the sedimentary rock .
As youve learned , radiometric dating can only be done on certain materials .
But these important numbers can still be used to get the ages of other materials !
In this way , geologists can figure out the approximate ages of many different rock formations .
The Clean Air Act of 1970 and the amendments since then have done a great job in requiring people to clean up the air over the United States .
Emissions of the six major pollutants regulated by the Clean Air Act carbon monoxide , lead , nitrous oxides , ozone , sulfur dioxide , and particulates have decreased by more than 50 % .
Cars , power plants , and factories individually release less pollution than they did in the mid-20th century .
There is still much work to be done to continue to clean up the air .
Reducing air pollution from vehicles can be done in a number of ways .
Breaking down pollutants before they are released into the atmosphere .
Hybrids can reduce auto emissions by 90 % or more , but many models do not maximize the possible fuel efficiency of the vehicle .
A plug-in hybrid is plugged into an electricity source when it is not in use , perhaps in a garage , to make sure that the battery is charged .
Plug-in hybrids run for a longer time on electricity and so are less polluting than regular hybrids .
Plug-in hybrids began to become available in 2010 .
Fueling a car with something other than a liquid organic-based fuel is difficult .
Hydrogen fuel cells harness the energy released when hydrogen and oxygen come together to create water -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Fuel cells are extremely efficient and they produce no pollutants .
Motor vehicles emit less pollution than they once did because of catalytic converters -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
But developing fuel-cell technology has had many problems and no one knows when or if they will become practical .
Catalytic converters contain a catalyst that speeds up chemical reactions and breaks down nitrous oxides , carbon monoxide , and VOCs .
Catalytic converters only work when they are hot , so a lot of exhaust escapes as the car is warming up .
Catalytic converters are placed on mod - ern cars in the United States .
Making a vehicle more fuel efficient .
Lighter , more streamlined vehicles need less energy .
The energy that would be lost during braking is funneled into charging the battery , which then can power the car .
Pollutants are removed from the exhaust streams of power plants and industrial plants before they enter the atmo - sphere .
Particulates can be filtered out , and sulfur and nitric oxides can be broken down by catalysts .
Removing these oxides reduces the pollutants that cause acid rain .
Scrubbers remove particles and waste gases from exhaust using liquids or neutralizing materials -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Gases , such as nitrogen oxides , can be broken down at very high temperatures .
Scrubbers remove particles and waste gases from exhaust .
In gasification , coal -LRB- rarely is another organic material used -RRB- is heated to extremely high temperatures to create syngas , which is then filtered .
The energy goes on to drive a generator .
Syngas releases about 80 % less pollution than regular coal plants , and greenhouse gases are also lower .
Clean coal plants do not need scrubbers or other pollution control devices .
Also , heating the coal to high enough temperatures uses a great deal of energy , so the technology is not energy efficient .
In addition , large amounts of the greenhouse gas CO2 are still released with clean coal technology .
Nonetheless , a few of these plants are operating in the United States and around the world .
Using less fossil fuel is one way to lessen pollution .
The technologies for several sources of alternative energy , including solar and wind , are still being developed .
The technology needs to advance so that the price falls .
Some areas get low amounts of sunlight and are not suited for solar .
It is important that regions develop what best suits them .
While the desert Southwest will need to develop solar , the Great Plains can use wind energy as its energy source .
Perhaps some locations will rely on nuclear power plants , although current nuclear power plants have major problems with safety and waste disposal .
Some examples of ways to conserve fossil fuels are : Riding a bike or walking instead of driving .
Buying fewer things that are manufactured using fossil fuels .
All these actions reduce the amount of energy that power plants need to produce .
One success story in reducing pollutants that harm the atmosphere concerns ozone-destroying chemicals .
In 1973 , scientists calculated that CFCs could reach the stratosphere and break apart .
This would release chlorine atoms , which would then destroy ozone .
Based only on their calculations , the United States and most Scandinavian countries banned CFCs in spray cans in 1978 .
More confirmation that CFCs break down ozone was needed before more was done to reduce production of ozone - destroying chemicals .
In 1985 , members of the British Antarctic Survey reported that a 50 % reduction in the ozone layer had been found over Antarctica in the previous three springs .
Two years after the British Antarctic Survey report , the `` Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer '' was ratified by nations all over the world .
The Montreal Protocol controls the production and consumption of 96 chemicals that damage the ozone layer -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Since CFCs take many years to reach the stratosphere and can survive there a long time before they break down , the ozone hole will probably continue to grow for some time before it begins to shrink .
Hazardous substances are phased out first by developed nations and one decade later by developing nations .
More hazardous substances are phased out more quickly .
CFCs have been mostly phased out since 1995 , although were used in developing nations until 2010 .
The Protocol also requires that wealthier nations donate money to develop technologies that will replace these chemicals .
Ozone levels over North America decreased between 1974 and 2009 .
Warmer colors indicate more ozone .
Certainly no one today doubts that Earth orbits a star , the Sun .
Photos taken from space , observations made by astronauts , and the fact that there has been so much successful space exploration that depends on understanding the structure of the solar system all confirm it .
But in the early 17th century saying that Earth orbited the Sun rather than the reverse could get you tried for heresy , as it did Galileo .
Lets explore the evolution of the idea that Earth orbits the Sun .
That is what the ancient Greeks believed .
One problem with the geocentric model is that some planets seem to move backwards -LRB- in retrograde -RRB- instead of in their usual forward motion around Earth .
Around 150 A.D. the astronomer Ptolemy resolved this problem by using a system of circles to describe the motion of planets -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
In Ptolemys system , a planet moves in a small circle , called an epicycle .
This circle moves around Earth in a larger circle , called a deferent .
Ptolemys version of the geocentric model worked so well that it remained the accepted model of the universe for more than a thousand years .
In the geocentric model , the sky , or heavens , are a set of spheres layered on top of one another .
Each object in the sky is attached to a sphere and moves around Earth as that sphere rotates .
From Earth outward , these spheres contain the Moon , Mercury , Venus , the Sun , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn .
An outer sphere holds all the stars .
Since the planets appear to move much faster than the stars , the Greeks placed them closer to Earth .
The geocentric model explained why all the stars appear to rotate around Earth once per day .
The model also explained why the planets move differently from the stars and from each other .
Ptolemys geocentric model worked , but it was complicated and occasionally made errors in predicting the movement of planets .
At the beginning of the 16th century A.D. , Nicolaus Copernicus proposed that Earth and all the other planets orbit the Sun .
Galileo also discovered that Venus has phases like the Moon -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- , which provides direct evidence that Venus orbits the Sun .
Galileos discoveries caused many more people to accept the heliocentric model of the universe , although Galileo himself was found guilty of heresy .
The shift from an Earth-centered view to a Sun-centered view of the universe is referred to as the Copernican Revolution .
This movement is called revolution .
At the same time , Earth spins on its axis .
Earths axis is an imaginary line passing through the Keplers model showed the planets moving around the Sun in ellipses .
This spinning movement is called Earths rotation .
With the Sun at the center , this model is called the heliocentric model , or `` sun-centered '' model .
Johannes Kepler solved the problem a short time later when he determined that the planets moved around the Sun in ellipses -LRB- ovals -RRB- , not circles -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Keplers model matched observations perfectly .
The heliocentric model did not catch on right away .
When Galileo Galilei first turned a telescope to the heavens in 1610 , he made several striking discoveries .
Galileo discovered that the planet Jupiter has moons orbiting around it .
This provided the first evidence that objects could orbit something besides Earth .
The gravitational pull of the Sun keeps the planets in orbit .
Earth and the other planets in the solar system make elliptical orbits around the Sun .
For Earth to make one complete revolution around the Sun takes 365.24 days .
Earth has one large moon , which orbits Earth once every 29.5 days , a period known as a month .
A rock is a naturally formed , non-living Earth material .
Rocks are made of collections of mineral grains that are held together in a firm , solid mass -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The different colors and textures seen in this rock are caused by the presence of different minerals .
Sample 2 Crystals are tiny or microscopic Magma erupted and cooled quickly Andesite As seen in Table 1.1 , these two rocks have the same chemical composition and contain mostly the same minerals , but they do not have the same texture .
The two different textures indicate different histories .
Sample 1 is a diorite , a rock that cooled slowly from magma -LRB- molten rock -RRB- underground .
Sample 2 is an andesite , a rock that cooled rapidly from a very similar magma that erupted onto Earths surface .
A few rocks are not made of minerals because the material they are made of does not fit the definition of a mineral .
Coal , for example , is made of organic material , which is not a mineral .
Can you think of other rocks that are not made of minerals ?
The mineral grains in a rock may be so tiny that you can only see them with a microscope , or they may be as big as your fingernail or even your finger -LRB- Figure Rocks are identified primarily by the minerals they contain and by their texture .
A rock may be made of grains of all one mineral type , such as quartzite .
Much more commonly , rocks are made of a mixture of different minerals .
The rock cycle , illustrated in Figure 1.1 , depicts how the three major rock types - igneous , sedimentary , and meta - morphic - convert from one to another .
Arrows connecting the rock types represent the processes that accomplish these changes .
Rocks change as a result of natural processes that are taking place all the time .
Most changes happen very slowly .
Rocks at the surface are lying in place before they are next exposed to a process that will change them .
Rocks are classified into three major groups according to how they form .
These three types are described in more detail in other concepts in this chapter , but here is a summary .
Sedimentary rocks also include chemical precipitates , the solid materials left behind after a liquid evaporates .
Metamorphic rocks form when the minerals in an existing rock are changed by heat or pressure below the surface .
Igneous rocks form from the cooling and hardening of molten magma in many different environments .
The chemical composition of the magma and the rate at which it cools determine what rock forms .
Igneous rocks can cool slowly beneath the surface or rapidly at the surface .
These rocks are identified by their composition and texture .
Sedimentary rocks form by the compaction and cementing together of sediments , broken pieces of rock-like gravel , sand , silt , or clay .
Those sediments can be formed from the weathering and erosion of preexisting rocks .
Several processes can turn one type of rock into another type of rock .
Magma cools either underground or on the surface and hardens into an igneous rock .
As the magma cools , different crystals form at different temperatures , undergoing crystallization .
For example , the mineral olivine crystallizes out of magma at much higher temperatures than quartz .
The rate of cooling determines how much time the crystals will have to form .
Slow cooling produces larger crystals .
Weathering wears rocks at the Earths surface down into smaller pieces .
The small fragments are called sediments .
During sedimen - tation , the sediments are laid down or deposited .
In order to form a sedimentary rock , the accumulated sediment must become compacted and cemented together .
When a rock is exposed to extreme heat and pressure within the Earth but does not melt , the rock becomes meta - morphosed .
In 1851 , a French scientist named Lon Foucault took an iron sphere and hung it from a wire .
Although a pendulum set in motion should not change its motion , Foucault observed that his pendulum did seem to change direction relative to the circle below .
Foucault concluded that Earth was moving underneath the pendulum .
People at that time already knew that Earth rotated on its axis , but Foucaults experiment was nice confirmation .
Imagine a line passing through the center of Earth that goes through both the North Pole and the South Pole .
This imaginary line is called an axis .
Earth spins around its axis , just as a top spins around its spindle .
An observer in space will see that Earth requires 23 hours , 59 minutes , and 4 seconds to make one complete rotation on its axis .
But because Earth moves around the Sun at the same time that it is rotating , the planet must turn just a little bit more to reach the same place relative to the Sun .
At the Equator , the Earth rotates at a speed of about 1,700 km per hour , but at the poles the movement speed is nearly nothing .
To an observer looking down at the North Pole , the rotation appears counterclockwise .
From nearly all points on Earth , the Sun appears to move across the sky from east to west each day .
Of course , the Sun is not moving from east to west at all ; Earth is rotating .
The Moon and stars also seem to rise in the east and set in the west .
Earths rotation means that there is a cycle of daylight and darkness approximately every 24 hours , the length of a day .
Different places experience sunset and sunrise at different times and the amount of daylight and darkness also differs by location .
Shadows are areas where an object obstructs a light source so that darkness takes on the form of the object .
On Earth , a shadow can be cast by the Sun , Moon , or -LRB- rarely -RRB- Mercury or Venus .
The water that comes out of our faucets is safe because it has gone through a series of treatment and purification processes to remove contaminants .
Those of us who are fortunate enough to always be able to get clean water from a tap in our home may have trouble imagining life in a country that can not afford the technology to treat and purify water .
Many people in the world have no choice but to drink from the same polluted river where sewage is dumped .
Unsafe drinking water carries many pathogens , or disease-causing biological agents such as infectious bacteria and parasites .
Toxic chemicals and radiological hazards in water can also cause diseases .
Waterborne disease caused by unsafe drinking water is the leading cause of death for children under the age of five in many nations and a cause of death and illness for many adults .
About 88 % of all diseases are caused by drinking unsafe water -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Throughout the world , more than 14,000 people die every day from waterborne diseases , such as cholera , and many of the worlds hospital beds are occupied by patients suffering from a waterborne disease .
Guinea worm is a serious problem in parts of Africa that is being eradicated .
Learn what is being done to decrease the number of people suffering from this parasite at the video below .
A rocket is propelled into space by particles flying out of one end at high speed -LRB- see Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
A rocket in space moves like a skater holding the fire extinguisher .
Fuel is ignited in a chamber , which causes an explosion of gases .
The explosion creates pressure that forces the gases out of the rocket .
As these gases rush out the end , the rocket moves in the opposite direction , as predicted by Newtons Third Law of Motion .
The reaction force of the gases on the rocket pushes the rocket forward .
Nothing would get into space without being thrust upward by a rocket .
The International Space Station , the largest artificial satellite , is designed for humans to live in space while conducting scientific research .
Thousands of artificial satellites have been put into orbit around Earth -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Imaging satellites take pictures of Earths surface for military or scientific purposes .
Imaging satellites study the Moon and other planets .
Communications satellites receive and send signals for telephone , television , or other types of communica - tions .
Humans have a presence in space at the International Space Station -LRB- ISS -RRB- -LRB- pictured in Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Modern space stations are constructed piece by piece to create a modular system .
Craft designed for human spaceflight , like the Apollo missions , were very successful , but were also very expensive , could not carry much cargo , and could be used only once .
To outfit the ISS , NASA needed a space vehicle that was reusable and able to carry large pieces of equipment , such as satellites , space telescopes , or sections of a space station .
All of this is needed to get the orbiter out of Earths atmosphere .
Once in space , the orbiter can be used to release equipment -LRB- such as a satellite or supplies for the International Space Station -RRB- , to repair existing equipment such as the Hubble Space Telescope , or to do experiments directly on board the orbiter .
When the mission is complete , the orbiter re-enters Earths atmosphere and flies back to Earth more like a glider than an airplane .
The Space Shuttle program did 135 missions between 1981 and 2011 , when the remaining shuttles were retired .
The ISS is now serviced by Russian Soyuz spacecraft .
Since 1981 , the space shuttle has been the United States primary vehicle for carrying people and large equipment into space .
Satellites operate with solar panels for energy .
A photograph of the International Space Station was taken from the space shuttle Atlantis in June 2007 .
Construction of the station was completed in 2011 , but new pieces and experiments continue to be added .
When a space shuttle launches , the orbiter is attached to a huge fuel tank that contains liquid fuel .
Saturn , shown in Figure 1.1 , is famous for its beautiful rings .
Although all the gas giants have rings , only Saturns can be easily seen from Earth .
These rotate rapidly around the planet , but there seems to be less turbulence and fewer storms on Saturn than on Jupiter .
One interesting phenomenon that has been observed in the storms on Saturn is the presence of thunder and lightning -LRB- see video , below -RRB- .
This image of Saturn and its rings is a composite of pictures taken by the Cassini orbiter in 2008
Like Jupiter , Saturn is made mostly of hydrogen and helium gases in the outer layers and liquids at greater depths .
In 1610 , Galileo first observed Saturns rings with his telescope , but he thought they might be two large moons , one on either side of the planet .
In 1659 , the Dutch astronomer Christian Huygens realized that the features were rings -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Saturns rings circle the planets equator and appear tilted because Saturn itself is tilted about 27 degrees .
The rings do not touch the planet .
The Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft in 1980 and 1981 sent back detailed pictures of Saturn , its rings , and some of its moons .
Saturns rings are made of particles of water and ice , with some dust and rocks -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
There are several gaps in the rings that scientists think have originated because the material was cleared out by the gravitational pull within the rings , or by the gravitational forces of Saturn and of moons outside the rings .
The rings were likely formed by the breakup of one of Saturns moons or from material that never accreted into the planet when Saturn originally formed .
Most of Saturns moons are very small , and only seven are large enough for gravity to have made them spherical .
Scientists are interested in Titan because its atmosphere is similar to what Earths was like before life developed .
Lakes of liquid methane -LRB- CH4 -RRB- and ethane -LRB- C2 H6 -RRB- are found on Titans surface .
Although conditions are similar enough to those of early Earth for scientists to speculate that extremely A color-exaggerated mosaic of Saturn and its rings taken by Cassini as Saturn eclipses the Sun .
This composite image compares Saturns largest moon , Titan -LRB- right -RRB- to Earth -LRB- left -RRB- .
Such a system is impossible for scientists to work with as a whole .
To deal with such complexity , scientists may create models to represent the system that they are interested in studying .
Scientists must validate their ideas by testing .
A model can be manipulated and adjusted far more easily than a real system .
Models help scientists understand , analyze , and make predictions about systems that would be impossible to study as a whole .
If a scientist wants to understand how rising CO2 levels will affect climate , it will be easier to model a smaller portion of that system .
For example , he may model how higher levels of CO2 affect plant growth and the effect that will have on climate .
How can scientists know if a model designed to predict the future is likely to be accurate , since it may not be possible to wait long enough to see if the prediction comes true ?
One way is to run the model using a time in the past as the starting point see if the model can accurately predict the present .
A model that can successfully predict the present is more likely to be accurate when predicting the future .
Many models are created on computers because only computers can handle and manipulate such enormous amounts of data .
For example , climate models are very useful for trying to determine what types of changes we can expect as the composition of the atmosphere changes .
A model deals with only a portion of a system .
But the more computing power that goes into the model and the care with which the scientists construct the model can increase the chances that a model will be accurate .
Conceptual models tie together many ideas to explain a phenomenon or event .
Mathematical models are sets of equations that take into account many factors to represent a phenomenon .
Harry Hess was a geology professor and a naval officer who commanded an attack transport ship during WWII .
Like other ships , Hesss ship had echo sounders that mapped the seafloor .
Hess discovered hundreds of flat-topped mountains in the Pacific that he gave the name guyot .
He puzzled at what could have formed mountains that appeared to be eroded at the top but were more than a mile beneath the sea surface .
Hess also noticed trenches that were as much as 7 miles deep .
Meanwhile , other scientists like Bruce Heezen discovered the underwater mountain range they called the Great Global Rift .
These scientists thought the rift was a set of breaks in Earths crust .
The final piece that was needed was the work of Vine and Matthews , who had discovered the bands of alternating magnetic polarity in the seafloor symmetrically about the rift .
The features of the seafloor and the patterns of magnetic polarity symmetrically about the mid-ocean ridges were the pieces that Hess needed .
Hess could also use seafloor spreading to explain the flat topped guyots .
He suggested that they were once active volcanoes that were exposed to erosion above sea level .
As the seafloor they sat on moved away from the ridge , the crust on which they sat become less buoyant and the guyots moved deeper beneath sea level .
Hess wrote that hot magma rose up into the rift valley at the mid-ocean ridges .
The lava oozed up and forced the existing seafloor away from the rift in opposite directions .
Since magnetite crystals point in the direction of the magnetic north pole as the lava cools , the different stripes of magnetic polarity revealed the different ages of the seafloor .
Hess called this idea seafloor spreading .
As oceanic crust forms and spreads , moving away from the ridge crest , it pushes the continent away from the ridge axis .
If the oceanic crust reaches a deep sea trench , it sinks into the trench and is lost into the mantle .
The oldest crust is coldest and lies deepest in the ocean because it is less buoyant than the hot new crust .
Convection currents within the mantle take the continents on a conveyor-belt ride of oceanic crust that , over millions of years , takes them around the planets surface .
The spreading plate takes along any continent that rides on it .
Instead , the seasons are caused by the 23.5 o tilt of Earths axis of rotation relative to its plane of orbit around the Sun -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The opposite occurs on winter solstice , which begins on December 21 .
More about seasons can be found in the Atmospheric Processes chapter .
Different areas also receive different amounts of sunlight in different seasons .
The seasons are caused by the direction Earths axis is pointing relative to the Sun .
The Earth revolves around the Sun once each year and spins on its axis of rotation once each day .
As the Earth orbits the Sun , the tilt of Earths axis stays lined up with the North Star .
The North Pole is tilted towards the Sun and the Suns rays strike the Northern Hemisphere more directly in summer -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
At the summer solstice , June 21 or 22 , the Suns rays hit the Earth most directly along the Tropic of Cancer -LRB- 23.5 o N -RRB- ; that is , the angle of incidence of the Suns rays there is zero -LRB- the angle of incidence is the deviation in the angle of an incoming ray from straight on -RRB- .
Winter solstice for the Northern Hemisphere happens on December 21 or 22 .
Light from the Sun is spread out over a larger area , so that area isnt heated as much .
With fewer daylight hours in winter , there is also less time for the Sun to warm the area .
Halfway between the two solstices , the Suns rays shine most directly at the Equator , called an equinox -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
The autumnal equinox happens on September 22 or 23 and the vernal , or spring , equinox happens March 21 or 22 in the Northern Hemisphere .
Remember that H2 O is a polar molecule , so it can dissolve many substances -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Salts , sugars , acids , bases , and organic molecules can all dissolve in water .
As water moves through rock and soil on land it picks up ions .
Ocean water is composed of many sub - stances , many of them salts such as sodium , magnesium , and calcium chlo - ride .
Because of the increased salinity , the wa - ter in the Dead Sea is very dense , it has such high salinity that people can easily float in it !
Salts comprise about 3.5 % of the mass of ocean water , but the salt content , or salinity , is different in different locations .
Why do you think this water body is called the Dead Sea ?
Rock Conglomerate Breccia Sandstone Siltstone Shale Sediment Size Large Large Sand-sized Silt-sized , smaller than sand Clay-sized , smallest Other Features Rounded Angular When sediments settle out of calmer water , they form horizontal layers .
One layer is deposited first , and another layer is deposited on top of it .
Table 1.2 shows some common types of sedimentary rocks .
Breccia Clastic Sandstone Clastic Siltstone Clastic Shale Clastic Rock Salt Chemical precipitate Dolostone Chemical precipitate Limestone Bioclastic -LRB- sediments from organic materials , or plant or animal re - mains -RRB- Coal Organic Click image to the left or use the URL below .
When the sediments harden , the layers are preserved .
Sedimentary rocks formed by the crystallization of chemical precipitates are called chemical sedimentary rocks .
As discussed in the concepts on minerals , dissolved ions in fluids precipitate out of the fluid and settle out , just like the halite in Figure 1.1 .
Biochemical sedimentary rocks form in the ocean or a salt lake .
Living creatures remove ions , such as calcium , magnesium , and potassium , from the water to make shells or soft tissue .
When the organism dies , it sinks to the ocean floor to become a biochemical sediment , which may then become compacted and cemented into solid rock -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Sandstone is one of the common types of sedimentary rocks that form from sediments .
Sediments are removed and transported by water , wind , ice , or gravity in a process called erosion -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Much more information about weathering and erosion can be found in the chapter Surface Processes and Landforms .
Streams carry huge amounts of sediment -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The more energy the water has , the larger the particle it can carry .
A rushing river on a steep slope might be able to carry boulders .
As this stream slows down , it no longer has the energy to carry large sediments and will drop them .
A slower moving stream will only carry smaller particles .
Water erodes the land surface in Alaskas Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes .
Sediments are deposited on beaches and deserts , at the bottom of oceans , and in lakes , ponds , rivers , marshes , and swamps .
Landslides drop large piles of sediment .
Sediments may include : fragments of other rocks that often have been worn down into small pieces , such as sand , silt , or clay .
Glaciers leave large piles of sediments , too .
Wind can only transport sand and smaller particles .
The type of sediment that is deposited will determine the type of sedimentary rock that can form .
Different colors of sedimentary rock are determined by the environment where they are deposited .
Red rocks form where oxygen is present .
Darker sediments form when the environment is oxygen poor .
chemical precipitates , which are materials that get left behind after the water evaporates from a solution .
Rocks at the surface undergo mechanical and chemical weathering .
These physical and chemical processes break rock into smaller pieces .
Mechanical weathering simply breaks the rocks apart .
Chemical weathering dissolves the less stable minerals .
These original elements of the minerals end up in solution and new minerals may form .
Energy is transmitted in waves .
Every wave has a high point called a crest and a low point called a trough .
The parts of a wave are illustrated in Figure 1.1 .
The energy from earthquakes travels in waves .
Seismologists use seismic waves to learn about earthquakes and also to learn about the Earths interior .
One ingenious way scientists learn about Earths interior is by looking at earthquake waves .
Seismic waves travel outward in all directions from where the ground breaks and are picked up by seismographs around the world .
P-waves and S-waves are known as body waves because they move through the solid body of the Earth .
P-waves travel through solids , liquids , and gases .
S-waves only move through solids -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
In an earthquake , body waves produce sharp jolts .
P-waves -LRB- primary waves -RRB- are fastest , traveling at about 6 to 7 kilometers -LRB- about 4 miles -RRB- per second , so they arrive first at the seismometer .
P-waves move in a compression/expansion type motion , squeezing and S-waves -LRB- secondary waves -RRB- are about half as fast as P-waves , traveling at about 3.5 km -LRB- 2 miles -RRB- per second , and arrive second at seismographs .
S-waves move in an up and down motion perpendicular to the direction of wave travel .
This produces a change in shape for the Earth materials they move through .
By tracking seismic waves , scientists have learned what makes up the planets interior -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
P-waves slow down at the mantle core boundary , so we know the outer core is less rigid than the mantle .
S-waves disappear at the mantle core boundary , so we know the outer core is liquid .
Surface waves travel along the ground , outward from an earthquakes epicenter .
Surface waves are the slowest of all seismic waves , traveling at 2.5 km -LRB- 1.5 miles -RRB- per second .
This cycle is called the ENSO -LRB- El Nio Southern Oscillation -RRB- .
The ENSO drives changes in climate that are felt around the world about every two to seven years .
In a normal year , the trade winds blow across the Pacific Ocean near the Equator from east to west -LRB- toward Asia -RRB- .
Warm water in the western Pacific Ocean raises sea levels by half a meter .
Upwelling brings cold , nutrient-rich waters from the deep sea .
In an El Nio year , when water temperature reaches around 28o C -LRB- 82o F -RRB- , the trade winds weaken or reverse direction and blow east -LRB- toward South America -RRB- -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Warm water is dragged back across the Pacific Ocean and piles up off the west coast of South America .
Sometimes circulation patterns bounce back quickly and extremely -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Since plankton form the base of the food web , fish can not find food , and fish numbers decrease as well .
All the animals that eat fish , including birds and humans , are affected by the decline in fish .
By altering atmospheric and oceanic circulation , El Nio events change global climate patterns .
Drought occurs in other parts of South America , the western Pacific , southern and northern Africa , and southern Europe .
An El Nio cycle lasts one to two years .
In a La Nia year , as in a normal year , trade winds moves from east to west and warm water piles up in the western Pacific Ocean .
Cold water reaches farther into the western Pacific than normal .
The North Atlantic Oscillation mostly alters climate in Europe .
Most of the energy that reaches the Earths surface comes from the Sun -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
About 44 % of solar radiation is in the visible light wavelengths , but the Sun also emits infrared , ultraviolet , and other wavelengths .
Of the solar energy that reaches the outer atmosphere , ultraviolet -LRB- UV -RRB- wavelengths have the greatest energy .
The three types are : UVC : the highest energy ultraviolet , does not reach the planets surface at all .
UVB : the second highest energy , is also mostly stopped in the atmosphere .
Most objects radiate infrared energy , which we feel as heat .
Some of the wavelengths of solar radiation traveling through the atmosphere may be lost because they are absorbed by various gases -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Ozone completely removes UVC , most UVB , and some UVA from incoming sunlight .
An image of the Sun taken by the SOHO spacecraft .
The sensor is picking up only the 17.1 nm wavelength , in the ultraviolet wavelengths .
Yel - low shows the energy that reaches the top of the atmosphere .
Red shows the wavelengths that reach sea level .
Energy from the Sun comes from the lightest element , hydrogen , fusing together to create the second lightest element , helium .
Nuclear fusion on the Sun releases tremendous amounts of solar energy .
The energy travels to the Earth , mostly as visible light .
The light carries the energy through the empty space between the Sun and the Earth as radiation .
Solar energy has been used for power on a small scale for hundreds of years , and plants have used it for billions of years .
Unlike energy from fossil fuels , which almost always come from a central power plant or refinery , solar power can be harnessed locally -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The energy conducted by the heated liquid is used to make electricity .
This solar power plant uses mirrors to focus sunlight on the tower in the center .
The sunlight heats a liquid inside the tower to a very high temperature , producing energy to make electricity .
A set of solar panels on a homes rooftop can be used to heat water for a swimming pool or can provide electricity to the house .
Societys use of solar power on a larger scale is just starting to increase .
Because of the tremendous amount of incoming sunlight , solar power is being developed in the United States in southeastern California , Nevada , and Arizona .
Solar power plants turn sunlight into electricity using a large group of mirrors to focus sunlight on one place , called a receiver -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
A liquid , such as oil or water , flows through this receiver and is heated to a high temperature by the focused sunlight .
The heated liquid transfers its heat to a nearby object that is at a lower temperature through a process called conduction .
The technology needed for solar power is still expensive .
An increase in interested customers will provide incentive for companies to research and develop new technologies and to figure out how to mass-produce existing technologies -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Solar panels require a lot of space .
Fortunately , solar panels can be placed on any rooftop to supply at least some of the power required for a home or business .
A coil of an electric stove will start out black , but with added heat will start to glow a dull red .
With more heat , the coil turns a brighter red , then orange .
At extremely high temperatures the coil will turn yellow-white , or even blue-white -LRB- its hard to imagine a stove coil getting that hot -RRB- .
A stars color is also determined by the temperature of the stars surface .
Color is the most common way to classify stars .
Table 1.1 shows the classification system .
The class of a star is given by a letter .
Each letter corresponds to a color , and also to a range of temperatures .
Note that these letters dont match the color names ; they are left over from an older system that is no longer used .
Class O B A F G K M Color Blue Blue-white White Yellowish-white Yellow Orange Red Temperature Range 30,000 K or more 10,000-30 ,000 K 7,500-10 ,000 K 6,000-7 ,500 K 5,500-6 ,000 K 3,500-5 ,000 K 2,000-3 ,500 K Sample Star Zeta Ophiuchi Rigel Altair Procyon A Sun Epsilon Indi Betelgeuse , Proxima Cen - tauri For most stars , surface temperature is also related to size .
Stars differ in size , temperature , and age , but they all appear to be made up of the same elements and to behave according to the same principles .
People of many different cultures , including the Greeks , identified patterns of stars in the sky .
Figure 1.1 shows one of the most easily recognized constellations .
Why do the patterns in constellations and in groups or clusters of stars , called asterisms , stay the same night after night ?
Although the stars move across the sky , they stay in the same patterns .
This is because the apparent nightly motion of the stars is actually caused by the rotation of Earth on its axis .
The patterns also shift in the sky with the seasons as Earth revolves around the Sun .
As a result , people in a particular location can see different constellations in the winter than in the summer .
Although the stars in a constellation appear close together as we see them in our night sky , they are not at all close together out in space .
There is no reason to think that the alignment of the stars has anything to do with events that happen on Earth .
The constellations were defined by people who noticed that patterns could be made from stars , but the patterns do not reflect any characteristics of the stars themselves .
When scientific tests are done to provide evidence in support of astrological ideas , the tests fail .
Astrologers do not change or abandon their ideas .
The Sun is Earths major source of energy , yet the planet only receives a small portion of its energy .
Many stars produce much more energy than the Sun .
In particle accelerators , subatomic particles are propelled until they have attained almost the same amount of energy as found in the core of a star -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
When these particles collide head-on , new particles are created .
This process simulates the nuclear fusion that takes place in the cores of stars .
The process also simulates the conditions A diagram of a star like the Sun .
that allowed for the first helium atom to be produced from the collision of two hydrogen atoms in the first few minutes of the universe .
The SLAC National Accelerator Lab in California can propel particles a straight 2 mi -LRB- 3.2 km -RRB- .
The CERN Particle Accelerator presented in this video is the worlds largest and most powerful particle accelerator .
The accelerator can boost subatomic particles to energy levels that simulate conditions in the stars and in the early history of the universe before stars formed .
Water is simply two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen bonded together -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
This means that one side , the side with the hydrogen ions , has a slightly positive electrical charge .
Water expands when it freezes , has high surface tension -LRB- because of the polar nature of the molecules , they tend to stick together -RRB- , and others .
Without water , life might not be able to exist on Earth and it certainly would not have the tremendous complexity and diversity that we see .
-LRB- a -RRB- Ice floating in the sea .
-LRB- c -RRB- Water vapor is invisible , but clouds that form when water vapor condenses are not .
There is little mixing between the stratosphere , the layer above the troposphere , and the troposphere below it .
Sometimes ash and gas from a large volcanic eruption may burst into the stratosphere .
In the stratosphere , temperature increases with altitude .
The ozone layer in the stratosphere absorbs high energy ultraviolet radiation , which breaks the ozone molecule -LRB- 3-oxygens -RRB- apart into an oxygen molecule -LRB- 2-oxygens -RRB- and an oxygen atom -LRB- 1 - oxygen -RRB- .
In the mid-stratosphere there is less UV light and so the oxygen atom and molecule recombine to from ozone .
The creation of the ozone molecule releases heat .
Because warmer , less dense air sits over cooler , denser air , air in the stratosphere is stable .
As a result , there is little mixing of air within the layer .
The ozone layer is found within the stratosphere between 15 to 30 km -LRB- 9 to 19 miles -RRB- altitude .
High-energy UV light penetrates cells and damages DNA , leading to cell death -LRB- which we know as a bad sunburn -RRB- .
Organisms on Earth are not adapted to heavy UV exposure , which kills or damages them .
Without the ozone layer to absorb UVC and UVB radiation , most complex life on Earth would not survive long .
The thickness of the ozone layer varies by the season and also by latitude .
Ozone is created in the stratosphere by solar energy .
One oxygen atom combines with another oxygen molecule to create an ozone molecule , O3 .
This is a natural cycle that leaves some ozone in the stratosphere .
The ozone layer is extremely important because ozone gas in the stratosphere absorbs most of the Suns harmful ultraviolet -LRB- UV -RRB- radiation .
Because of this , the ozone layer protects life on Earth .
Geologists recognize many categories of streams depending on their size , depth , speed , and location .
In streams , water always flows downhill , but the form that downhill movement takes varies with rock type , topography , and many other factors .
People have used rivers since the beginning of civilization as a source of water , food , transportation , defense , power , recreation , and waste disposal .
With its high mountains , valleys and Pacific coastline , the western United States exhibits nearly all of the features common to rivers and streams .
A stream originates at its source .
A source is likely to be in the high mountains where snows collect in winter and melt in summer , or a source might be a spring .
Two streams come together at a confluence .
The point at which a stream comes into a large body of water , like an ocean or a lake , is called the mouth .
Where the stream meets the ocean or lake is an estuary -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The mouth of the Klamath River creates an estuary where it flows into the Pacific Ocean in California .
The mix of fresh and salt water where a river runs into the ocean creates a diversity of environments where many different types of organisms create unique ecosystems .
As a stream flows from higher elevations , like in the mountains , towards lower elevations , like the ocean , the work of the stream changes .
The higher the elevation , the farther the stream is from where it will reach base level and the more cutting it has to do .
The stream moves fast and does lots of work eroding the stream bed .
As a stream moves into lower areas , the gradient is not as steep .
Now the stream does more work eroding the edges of its banks .
Many streams develop curves in their channels called meanders -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
As the river moves onto flatter ground , the stream erodes the outer edges of its banks to carve a floodplain , which is a flat , level area surrounding the stream channel -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
Base level is where a stream meets a large body of standing water , usually the ocean , but sometimes a lake or pond .
Streams work to down cut in their stream beds until they reach base level .
Rain that falls on the north side of a ridge flows into the northern drainage basin and rain that falls on the south side flows into the southern drainage basin .
On a much grander scale , entire continents have divides , known as continental divides .
A green floodplain surrounds the Red Rock River as it flows through Montana .
In the Rocky Mountains in Colorado , where does a raindrop falling on the western slope end up ?
-LRB- b -RRB- At Triple Divide Peak in Montana water may flow to the Pacific , the Atlantic , or Hudson Bay depending on where it falls .
A supervolcano must erupt more than 1,000 cubic km -LRB- 240 cubic miles -RRB- of material , compared with 1.2 km3 for Mount St. Helens or 25 km3 for Mount Pinatubo , a large eruption in the Philippines in 1991 .
However , scientists think that a very large magma chamber erupts entirely in one catastrophic explosion .
This creates a huge hole or caldera into which the surface collapses -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The caldera at Santorini in Greece is so large that it can only be seen by satellite .
Yellowstone sits above a hotspot that has erupted catastrophically three times : 2.1 million , 1.3 million , and 640,000 years ago .
Yellowstone has produced many smaller -LRB- but still enormous -RRB- eruptions more recently -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Fortunately , current activity at Yellowstone is limited to the regions famous geysers .
URL : The Yellowstone hotspot has produced enormous felsic eruptions .
The Yellowstone caldera collapsed in the most recent super eruption .
A supervolcano could change life on Earth as we know it .
Ash could block sunlight so much that photosynthesis would be reduced and global temperatures would plummet .
Volcanic eruptions could have contributed to some of the mass extinctions in our planets history .
No one knows when the next super eruption will be .
Interesting volcano videos are seen on National Geographic Videos , Environment Video , Natural Disasters , Earth - quakes : One interesting one is Mammoth Mountain , which explores Hot Creek and the volcanic area it is a part of in California .
The most noticeable surface features of the Sun are cooler , darker areas known as sunspots -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Sunspots are located where loops of the Suns magnetic field break through the surface and disrupt the smooth transfer of heat from lower layers of the Sun , making them cooler , darker , and marked by intense magnetic activity .
When a loop of the Suns magnetic field breaks through the surface , a sunspot is created where the loop comes out and where it goes back in again .
Sunspots usually occur in 11-year cycles , increasing from a minimum number to a maximum number and then gradually decreasing to a minimum number again .
If a loop of the Suns magnetic field snaps and breaks , it creates solar flares , which are violent explosions that release huge amounts of energy -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
A strong solar flare can turn into a coronal mass ejection .
A solar flare or coronal mass ejection releases streams of highly energetic particles that make up the solar wind .
The solar wind can be dangerous to spacecraft and astronauts because it sends out large amounts of radiation that can harm the human body .
Solar flares have knocked out entire power grids and disturbed radio , satellite , and cell phone communications .
-LRB- b -RRB- A close-up of a sunspot taken in ultraviolet light .
If plasma flows along a loop of the Suns magnetic field from sunspot to sunspot , it forms a glowing arch that reaches thousands of kilometers into the Suns atmosphere .
Prominences can last lengths of time ranging from a day to several months .
Most of the imagery comes from SDOs AIA instrument ; different colors represent different temperatures , a common technique for observing solar features .
SDO sees the entire disk of the Sun in extremely high spatial and temporal resolution , allowing scientists to zoom in on notable events such as flares , waves , and sunspots .
The video above was taken from the SDO , the most advanced spacecraft ever designed to study the Sun .
During its five-year mission , SDO will examine the Suns magnetic field and also provide a better understanding of the role the Sun plays in Earths atmospheric chemistry and climate .
Since just after its launch on February 11 , 2010 , SDO is providing images with clarity 10 times better than high-definition television and will return more comprehensive science data faster than any other solar-observing spacecraft .
The Solar Dynamics Observatory is a NASA spacecraft launched in early 2010 is obtaining IMAX-like images of the Sun every second of the day , generating more data than any NASA mission in history .
The data will allow researchers to learn about solar storms and other phenomena that can cause blackouts and harm astronauts .
Can society change and get on a sustain - able path ?
A topic generating a great deal of discussion these days is sustainable development .
Citizens can change their behavior to reduce the impact they have on the planet by demanding products that are produced sustainably .
When forests are logged , new trees should be planted .
Mining should be done so that the landscape is not destroyed .
People can consume less and think more about the impacts of what they do consume .
Will producing all that we need to keep the population growing result in a planet so polluted that the quality of life will be greatly diminished ?
Will warming temperatures cause problems for human populations ?
When scientists understand how Earths natural systems work , they can recognize how people are impacting them .
Scientists can work to develop technologies that can be used to solve problems wisely .
Engineers can develop cleaner energy sources to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions .
Volcanic activity is not able to account for the rise in atmospheric CO2 .
To test Hypothesis 1 from the concept `` Development of Hypotheses , '' we need to see if the amount of CO2 gas released by volcanoes over the past several decades has increased .
There are two ways volcanoes could account for the increase in CO2 : There has been an increase in volcanic eruptions in that time .
The CO2 content of volcanic gases has increased over time globally .
Another journal article states that major volcanic eruptions for the past 30 years have caused short-term cooling , not warming !
We look into the scientific literature and find this graph in the Figure 1.1 .
The black line represents all emis - sion types combined , and colored lines show emissions from individual fossil fu - els .
Fossil fuels have added an increasing amount of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in the mid 19th century .
The Hertzsprung-Russell diagram -LRB- often referred to as the H-R diagram -RRB- is a scatter graph that shows various classes of stars in the context of properties such as their luminosity , absolute magnitude , color , and effective temperature .
Created around 1910 by Ejnar Hertzsprung and Henry Norris Russell , the diagram provided a great help in understanding stellar evolution .
On the horizontal axis , as we move to the right , the temperature reduces by between 1,000 and 10,000 degrees K between each line .
This group of stars is called white dwarfs .
This group of stars are called red giants .
These stars have expanded to several thousand times the size of stars in the main sequence .
The very low brightness of a white dwarf comes from the emission of stored heat energy .
White dwarfs are thought to be the final evolutionary state of any star whose mass is not great enough to become a neutron star .
Approximately 97 % of the stars in our galaxy will become neutron stars .
After the hydrogen-fusing lifetime of a main-sequence star of low or medium mass ends , it will expand to a red giant which fuses helium to carbon and oxygen in its core .
The original diagram displayed the spectral type of stars on the horizontal axis and the absolute magnitude on the vertical axis .
If a red giant has insufficient mass to generate the core temperatures required to fuse carbon , around 1 billion K , an inert mass of carbon and oxygen will build up at its center .
After blowing off its outer layers to form a planetary nebula , the core will be left behind to form the remnant white dwarf .
White dwarfs are composed of carbon and oxygen .
A white dwarf is very hot when it is formed , but since it has no source of energy -LRB- no further fusion reactions -RRB- , it will gradually radiate away its energy and cool down .
Over a very long time , a white dwarf will cool to temperatures at which it will no longer emit significant light , and it will become a cold black dwarf .
With the gravitational collapse of the core , the fusion reactions now occur in a shell surrounding the core .
The outer layer of the star expands enormously up to 1000 times the size of the Sun .
When the Sun becomes a red giant , its volume will include the orbit of Mercury and Venus and maybe even Earth .
The increased size increases the luminosity even though the outer layer cools to only 3000 K or so .
The form below shows Kelvin temperature along the horizontal axis going from high temperature on the left to low temperature on the right and luminosity on the vertical axis .
The cooler outer layer causes it to be a red star .
After a few more million years , the star evolves into a white dwarf-planetary nebula system .
A luminosity of 100 on the axis would mean 100 times as bright as the Sun .
Most of the stars occupy a region in the diagram along a line called the Main Sequence .
During that stage , stars are fusing hydrogen into helium in their cores .
The position of the Sun in the main sequence is shown in the diagram .
The Astronomy of the ancient Greeks was linked to mathematics , and Greek astronomers sought to create geomet - rical models that could imitate the appearance of celestial motions .
This tradition originated around the 6th century BCE , with the followers of the mathematician Pythagoras -LRB- ~ 580 - 500 BCE -RRB- .
Pythagoras is given credit for being the first to realize that these two bodies were in fact the same planet , a notion he arrived at through observation and geometrical calculations .
Pythagoras was also one of the first to think that the Earth was round , a theory that was finally proved around 330 BCE by Aristotle .
-LRB- Although , as you are probably aware , many people in 1642 CE still believed the earth to be flat . -RRB-
Aristotle -LRB- 384 BCE - 322 BCE -RRB- demonstrates in his writings that he knew we see the moon by the light of the sun , how the phases of the moon occur , and understood how eclipses work .
Philosophically , he argued that each part of the earth is trying to be pulled to the center of the earth , and so the earth would naturally take on a spherical shape .
He then pointed out observations that support the idea of a spherical earth .
The only shape that always casts a circular shadow is a sphere .
Pythagoras believed that everything was related to mathematics and that through mathematics everything could be predicted and measured in rhythmic patterns or cycles .
There are constellations visible in the north that one can not see in the south and vice versa .
Aristotle talked about the work of earlier Greeks , who had developed an earth centered model of the planets .
While it is not sure if the earlier Greeks actually thought the planets moved in circles , it is clear that Aristotle did .
Aristotle rejected a moving earth for two reasons .
Using Aristotles ideas , if the earth were moving through space , if you tripped , you would not be in contact with the earth , and so would get left behind in space .
A second , but not as important , reason Aristotle rejected a moving earth is that he recognized that if the earth moved and rotated around the sun , there would be an observable parallax of the stars .
One can not see stellar parallax with the naked-eye , so Aristotle concluded that the earth must be at rest .
-LRB- The stars are so far away , that one needs a good telescope to measure stellar parallax , which was first measured in 1838 . -RRB-
Aristotle believed that the objects in the heavens are perfect and unchanging .
Aristotle and his ideas became very important because they became incorporated into the Catholic Churchs theology in the twelfth century by Thomas Aquinas .
In the early 16th century , the Church banned new interpretations of scripture and this included a ban on ideas of a moving earth .
While best known for the Pythagorean Theorem , Pythagoras did have some input into astronomy .
His theories dominated the worlds understanding of astronomy for over a thousand years .
While it is known that many astronomers published works during this time , only Ptolemys work The Almagest survived .
As outlined in the Almagest , the Universe according to Ptolemy was based on five main points : 1 -RRB- the celestial realm is spherical , 2 -RRB- the celestial realm moves in a circle , 3 -RRB- the earth is a sphere , 4 -RRB- the celestial realm orbit is a circle centered on the earth , and 5 -RRB- earth does not move .
Ptolemy also identified eight circular orbits surrounding earth where the other planets existed .
A serious problem with the earth-centered system was the fact that at certain times in their orbits , some of the planets appeared to move in the opposite direction of their normal movement .
This reverse direction movement is referred to as retrograde motion .
By the time of Pythagoras , the five planets visible to the naked eye - Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter and Saturn - had long been identified .
If the earth was to remain motionless at the center of the system , some very intricate designs were necessary to explain the movement of the retrograde planets .
In the Ptolemaic system , each retrograde planet moved by two spheres .
The Ptolemaic system had circles within circles that produced epicycles .
In the sketch above on the left , the red ball moved clockwise in its little circle while the entire orbit also orbited clockwise around the big circle .
This process produced a path like that shown in the sketch above on the right .
As the red ball moved around its path , at some times it would be moving clockwise and then for a short period , it would move counterclockwise .
This motion was able to explain the retrograde motion noted for some planets .
The names of these planets were initially derived from Greek mythology before being given the equivalent Roman mythological names , which are the ones we still use today .
The word planet is a Greek term meaning wanderer , as these bodies move across the sky at different speeds from the stars , which appear fixed in the same positions relative to each other .
For part of the year Venus appears in the eastern sky as an early morning object before disappearing and reappearing a few weeks later in the evening western sky .
Early Greek astronomers thought this was two different bodies and assigned the names Phosphorus and Hesperus to the morning and evening apparitions respectively .
It was not until 1543 , when Copernicus -LRB- 1473 - 1543 -RRB- introduced a sun-centered design -LRB- heliocentric -RRB- , that Ptolemys astronomy was seriously questioned and eventually overthrown .
Copernicus studied at the University of Bologna , where he lived in the same house as the principal astronomer there .
It has been suggested that Copernicus knew the publication would incur the wrath of the Catholic church and he didnt want to deal with problems so he didnt publish his theory until he was on his death bed .
Legend has it that a copy of the printers proof was placed in his hands as he lay in a coma , and he woke long enough to recognize what he was holding before he died .
While attending the university to study law and philosophy , he became interested in astronomy and spent most evenings observing the stars .
Tycho built his own instruments and made the most complete and accurate observations available without the use of a telescope .
Eventually , his fame led to an offer from King Frederick II of Denmark & Norway to fund the construction of an astronomical observatory .
The island of Van was chosen and in 1576 , construction began .
Tycho Brahe spent twenty years there , making observations on celestial bodies .
Copernicus assisted the astronomer in some of his observations and in the production of the annual astrological forecasts for the city .
During his life , Tycho Brahe did not accept Copernicus model of the universe .
As a theoretician , Tycho was a failure but his observations and the data he collected was far superior to any others made prior to the invention of the telescope .
After Tycho Brahes death , his assistant , Johannes Kepler used Tycho Brahes observations to calculate his own three laws of planetary motion .
In 1600 , Johannes Kepler -LRB- 1571 - 1630 -RRB- began working as Tychos assistant .
They recognized that neither the Ptolemaic -LRB- geocentric -RRB- or Copernican -LRB- heliocentric -RRB- models could predict positions of Mars as accurately as they could measure them .
Tycho died in 1601 and after that Kepler had full access to Tychos data .
Kepler later determined that the orbits were not circular but elliptical .
It is at Bologna that he probably first encountered a translation of Ptolemys Almagest that would later make it possible for Copernicus to successfully refute the ancient astronomer .
Later , at the University of Padua , Copernicus studied medicine , which was closely associated with astrology at that time due to the belief that the stars influenced the dispositions of the body .
Returning to Poland , Copernicus secured a teaching post at Wroclaw , where he primarily worked as a medical doctor and manager of Church affairs .
In so doing , he developed his theory of a system in which the Earth , like all the planets , revolved around the sun , and which simply and elegantly explained the curious retrograde movements of the planets .
Copernicus wrote his theory in De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium -LRB- On the Revolutions of the Celestial Orbs -RRB- .
The book was completed in 1530 or so , but it wasnt published until the year he died , 1543 .
Keplers three laws replaced the cumbersome epicycles to explain planetary motion with three mathematical laws that allowed the positions of the planets to be predicted with accuracies ten times better than Ptolemaic or Copernican models .
An imaginary line connecting a planet and the sun sweeps out equal areas during equal time intervals .
-LRB- Therefore , the earths orbital speed varies at different times of the year .
The earth moves fastest in its orbit when closest to the sun and slowest when farthest away . -RRB-
Keplers Second Law of Planetary Motion was calculated for Earth , then the hypothesis was tested using data for Mars , and it worked !
Keplers Third Law of Planetary Motion showed the relationship between the size of a planets orbit radius , R -LRB- 12 the major axis -RRB- , and its orbital period , T .
He provided the crucial observations that proved the Copernican hypothesis , and also laid the foundations for a correct understanding of how objects moved on the surface of the earth and of gravity .
One of the arguments against the Copernican system had been that if the moon were in orbit around the Earth and the Earth in orbit around the Sun , the Earth would leave the Moon behind as it moved around its orbit .
Galileo used his telescope to show that Venus , like the moon , went through a complete set of phases .
In the Ptolemaic system , Venus should always be in crescent phase as viewed from the Earth because the sun is beyond Venus , but in the Copernican system Venus should exhibit a complete set of phases over time as viewed from the Earth because it is illuminated from the center of its orbit .
It is important to note that this was the first empirical evidence -LRB- coming almost a century after Copernicus -RRB- that allowed a definitive test of the two models .
Until that point , both the Ptolemaic and Copernican models described the available data .
The primary attraction of the Copernican system was that it described the data in a simpler fashion , but here finally was conclusive evidence that not only was the Ptolemaic universe more complicated , it also was incorrect .
As each new observation was brought to light , increasing doubt was cast on the old views of the heavens .
Galileos challenge of the Churchs authority through his refutation of the Aristotelian concept of the Universe eventually got him into deep trouble .
Sir Isaac Newton -LRB- 1642-1727 -RRB- , who was born the same year that Galileo died , would build on Galileos ideas to demonstrate that the laws of motion in the heavens and the laws of motion on the earth were the same .
Thus Galileo began , and Newton completed , a synthesis of astronomy and physics in which astronomy was recognized as but a part of physics , and that the opinions of Aristotle were almost completely eliminated from both .
Many scientists consider Newton to be a peer of Einstein in scientific thinking .
The poet Alexander Pope wrote of Newton : Nature and Natures laws lay hid in night ; God said , Let Newton be !
In terms of astronomy , Newton gave reasons for and corrections to Keplers Laws .
Kepler had proposed three Laws of Planetary motion based on Tycho Brahes data .
Galileo did not invent the telescope , but he was the first to turn his telescope toward the sky to study the heavens systematically .
These Laws were supposed to apply only to the motions of the planets .
Newton changed all of that .
First , he demonstrated that the motion of objects on the Earth could be described by three new Laws of motion , and then he went on to show that Keplers three Laws of Planetary Motion were but special cases of Newtons three Laws when his gravitational force was postulated to exist between all masses in the Universe .
In fact , Newton showed that Keplers Laws of planetary motion were only approximately correct , and supplied the quantitative corrections that with careful observations proved to be valid .
His telescope was poorer than even a cheap modern amateur telescope , but what he observed in the heavens showed errors in Aristotles opinion of the universe and the worldview that it supported .
Observations through Galileos telescope made it clear that the earth-centered and earth doesnt move solar system of Aristotle was incorrect .
Galileo observed four points of light that changed their positions around the planet Jupiter and he concluded that these were moons in orbit around Jupiter .
These observations showed that there were new things in the heavens that Aristotle and Ptolemy had known nothing about .
Furthermore , they demonstrated that a planet could have moons circling it that would not be left behind as the planet moved around its orbit .
The Big Bang Theory is the dominant and highly supported theory of the origin of the universe .
It states that the universe began from an initial point which has expanded over billions of years to form the universe as we now know it .
In 1931 , Lemaitre went further with his predictions and by extrapolating backwards , found that the matter of the universe would reach an infinite density and temperature at a finite time in the past -LRB- around 15 billion years -RRB- .
This meant that the universe must have begun as a small , extremely dense point of matter .
At the time , the only other theory that competed with Lemaitres theory was the Steady State Theory of Fred Hoyle .
The steady state theory predicted that new matter was created which made it appear that the universe was expanding but that the universe was constant .
It was Hoyle who coined the term Big Bang Theory which he used as a derisive name for Lemaitres theory .
He predicted that cosmic microwave background radiation should exist throughout the universe as a remnant of the Big Bang .
As atoms formed from sub-atomic particles shortly after the Big Bang , electromagnetic radiation would be emitted and this radiation would still be observable today .
Gamow predicted that the expansion of the universe would cool the original radiation so that now the radiation would be in the microwave range .
The debate continued until 1965 when two Bell Telephone scientists stumbled upon the microwave radiation with their radio telescope .
In 1922 , Alexander Friedman found that the solutions to Einsteins general relativity equations resulted in an expanding universe .
Einstein , at that time , believed in a static , eternal universe so he added a constant to his equations to eliminate the expansion .
Einstein would later call this the biggest blunder of his life .
In 1924 , Edwin Hubble was able to measure the distance to observed celestial objects that were thought to be nebula and discovered that they were so far away they were not actually part of the Milky Way -LRB- the galaxy containing our sun -RRB- .
In 1927 , Georges Lemaitre , a physicist , suggested that the universe must be expanding .
Lemaitres theory was supported by Hubble in 1929 when he found that the galaxies most distant from us also had the greatest red shift -LRB- were moving away from us with the greatest speed -RRB- .
The idea that the most distance galaxies were moving away from us at the greatest speed was exactly what was predicted by Lemaitre .
The density of molecules is so low in the thermosphere that one gas molecule can go about 1 km before it collides with another molecule .
Since so little energy is transferred , the air feels very cold -LRB- See opening image -RRB- .
The ionosphere gets its name from the solar radiation that ionizes gas molecules to create a positively charged ion and one or more negatively charged electrons .
The freed electrons travel within the ionosphere as electric currents .
At night , radio waves bounce off the ionosphere and back to Earth .
The Van Allen radiation belts are two doughnut-shaped zones of highly charged particles that are located very high the atmosphere in the magnetosphere .
The particles originate in solar flares and fly to Earth on the solar wind .
These lines extend from above the Equator to the North Pole and also to the South Pole , then return to the Equator .
When massive solar storms cause the Van Allen belts to become overloaded with particles , the result is the most spectacular feature of the ionosphere the nighttime aurora -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The charged particles energize oxygen and nitrogen gas molecules , causing them to light up .
Each gas emits a particular color of light .
-LRB- b -RRB- The aurora australis or southern lights encircles Antarctica .
This QUEST video looks at the aurora , which provides clues about the solar wind , Earths magnetic field and Earths atmosphere .
The solar wind is made of high-speed particles , mostly protons and electrons , traveling rapidly outward from the Sun .
As the Earth rotates beneath the Moon , a single spot will experience two high tides and two low tides approximately every day .
High tides occur about every 12 hours and 25 minutes .
The reason is that the Moon takes 24 hours and 50 minutes to rotate once around the Earth , so the Moon is over the same location every 24 hours and 50 minutes .
Since high tides occur twice a day , one arrives each 12 hours and 25 minutes .
The gravity of the Sun also pulls Earths water towards it and causes its own tides .
Some coastal areas do not follow this pattern at all .
These differences are often because of local conditions , such as the shape of the coastline that the tide is entering .
The gravitational attraction of the Moon to ocean water creates the high and low tides .
The Moons pull is about twice that of the Suns .
To understand the tides it is easiest to start with the effect of the Moon on Earth .
As the Moon revolves around our planet , its gravity pulls Earth toward it .
The lithosphere is unable to move much , but the water is pulled by the gravity and a bulge is created .
On the other side of the Earth , a high tide is produced where the Moons pull is weakest .
These two water bulges on opposite sides of the Earth aligned with the Moon are the high tides .
The tidal range in a location depends on a number of factors , including the slope of the seafloor .
Water appears to move a greater distance on a gentle slope than on a steep slope .
If you look at the diagram of high and low tides on a circular Earth above , youll see that tides are waves .
Studying ocean tides rhythmic movements helps scientists understand the ocean and the Sun/Moon/Earth system .
This QUEST video explains how tides work , and visits the oldest continually operating tidal gauge in the Western Hemisphere .
These more extreme tides , with a greater tidal range , are called spring tides .
Spring tides dont just occur in the spring ; they occur whenever the Moon is in a new-moon or full-moon phase , about every 14 days .
Neap tides are tides that have the smallest tidal range , and they occur when the Earth , the Moon , and the Sun form a 90o angle -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
How do the tides add up to create neap tides ?
The Moons high tide occurs in the same place as the Suns low tide and the Moons low tide in the same place as the Suns high tide .
Tree trunks display alternating bands of light-colored , low density summer growth and dark , high density winter growth .
question and the scale created by scientists .
The outermost ring indicates when the tree stopped growing ; that is , when it died .
The tree-ring record is extremely useful for finding the age of ancient structures .
Each light-dark band represents one year .
By counting tree rings it is possible to find the number of years the tree lived -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The width of these growth rings varies with the conditions present that year .
A summer drought may make the tree grow more slowly than normal and so its light band will be relatively small .
These tree-ring variations appear in all trees in a region .
The same distinctive pattern can be found in all the trees in an area for the same time period .
Scientists have created continuous records of tree rings going back over the past 2,000 years .
Wood fragments from old buildings and ancient ruins can be age dated by matching up the pattern of tree rings in the wood fragment in Cross-section showing growth rings .
Besides tree rings , other processes create distinct yearly layers that can be used for dating .
On a glacier , snow falls in winter but in summer dust accumulates .
This leads to a snow-dust annual pattern that goes down into the ice -LRB- Figure gather allows them to determine how the environment has changed as the glacier has stayed in its position .
Analyses of the ice tell how concentrations of atmospheric gases changed , which can yield clues about climate .
The longest cores allow scientists to create a record of polar climate stretching back hundreds of thousands of years .
In the summer , the glacier melts rapidly , producing a thick deposit of sediment .
These alternate with thin , clay-rich layers deposited in the winter .
The resulting layers , called varves , give scientists clues about past climate conditions -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
A warm summer might result in a very thick sediment layer while a cooler summer might yield a thinner layer .
The temperature of the troposphere is highest near the surface of the Earth and decreases with altitude .
The rising and sinking of air in the troposphere means that all of the planets weather takes place in the troposphere .
Rock , soil , and water on Earth absorb the Suns light and radiate it back into the atmosphere as heat , so there is more heat near the surface .
The temperature is also higher near the surface because gravity pulls in more gases .
The greater density of gases causes the temperature to rise .
The warm air near the surface rises and cool air higher in the troposphere sinks , so air in the troposphere does a lot of mixing .
This mixing causes the temperature gradient to vary with time and place .
Sometimes there is a temperature inversion , in which air temperature in the troposphere increases with altitude and warm air sits over cold air .
Inversions are very stable and may last for several days or even weeks .
This means that the cooler , denser air of the troposphere is trapped beneath the warmer , less dense air of the stratosphere .
Inversions form : Over land at night or in winter when the ground is cold .
The cold ground cools the air that sits above it , making this low layer of air denser than the air above it .
Near the coast , where cold seawater cools the air above it .
When that denser air moves inland , it slides beneath the warmer air over the land .
Since temperature inversions are stable , they often trap pollutants and produce unhealthy air conditions in cities -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Smoke makes a temperature inversion visible .
The smoke is trapped in cold dense air that lies beneath a cap of warmer air .
Less frequently , these waves can be generated by other shocks to the sea , like a meteorite impact .
Fortunately , few undersea earthquakes , and even fewer meteorite impacts , generate tsunami .
When traveling up a slope onto a shoreline , the wave is pushed upward .
As with wind waves , the speed of the bottom of the wave is slowed by friction .
This causes the wavelength to decrease and the wave to become unstable .
These factors can create an enormous and deadly wave .
Landslides , meteorite impacts , or any other jolt to ocean water may form a tsunami .
Tsunami can travel at speeds of 800 kilometers per hour -LRB- 500 miles per hour -RRB- .
The two types of air pollutants are primary pollutants , which enter the atmosphere directly , and secondary pollutants , which form from a chemical reaction .
Dust is natural but exacerbated by human activities ; for example , when the ground is torn up for agriculture or development .
Nitrogen oxides contribute to acid rain .
These form when sulfur from burning coal reaches the air .
Particulates can contribute to asthma , heart disease , and some types of cancers .
Lead was once widely used in automobile fuels , paint , and pipes .
This heavy metal can cause brain damage or blood poisoning .
High CO2 levels are found in major metropolitan areas and along the major interstate highways .
Particulates from a brush fire give the sky a strange glow in Arizona .
Primary pollutants include : Carbon oxides include carbon monoxide -LRB- CO -RRB- and carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Nitrogen oxides are produced when nitrogen and oxygen from the atmosphere come together at high temper - atures .
This occurs in hot exhaust gas from vehicles , power plants , or factories .
A rise in the number of vehicles in cities worldwide has increased photochemical smog .
If nitric oxide levels are high , ozone will not be created .
Photochemical smog peaks at midday on the hottest days of summer .
Photochemical smog forms when car exhaust is exposed to sunlight .
Nitrogen oxide is created by gas combustion in cars and then into the air -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
In the presence of sunshine , the NO2 splits and releases an oxygen ion -LRB- O -RRB- .
The O then combines with an oxygen molecule -LRB- O2 -RRB- to form ozone -LRB- O3 -RRB- .
This reaction can also go in reverse : Nitric oxide -LRB- NO -RRB- removes an oxygen atom from ozone to make it O2 .
The direction the reaction goes depends on how much NO2 and NO there is .
If NO2 is three times more abundant than NO , ozone will be produced .
Most fossils are preserved by one of five processes outlined below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- :
Insects have been preserved perfectly in amber , which is ancient tree sap .
Mammoths and a Neanderthal hunter were frozen in glaciers , allowing scientists the rare opportunity to examine their skin , hair , and organs .
Scientists collect DNA from these remains and compare the DNA sequences to those of modern counterparts .
After a bone , wood fragment , or shell is buried in sediment , mineral-rich water moves through the sediment .
This water deposits minerals into empty spaces and Five types of fossils : -LRB- a -RRB- insect preserved in amber , -LRB- b -RRB- petrified wood -LRB- permineralization -RRB- , -LRB- c -RRB- cast and mold of a clam shell , -LRB- d -RRB- pyritized ammonite , and -LRB- e -RRB- compression fossil of a fern .
Fossil dinosaur bones , petrified wood , and many marine fossils were formed by permineralization .
When the original bone or shell dissolves and leaves behind an empty space in the shape of the material , the depression is called a mold .
The space is later filled with other sediments to form a matching cast within the mold that is the shape of the original organism or part .
Many mollusks -LRB- clams , snails , octopi , and squid -RRB- are found as molds and casts because their shells dissolve easily .
The original shell or bone dissolves and is replaced by a different mineral .
If a fossil that has been replace by quartz is surrounded by a calcite matrix , mildly acidic water may dissolve the calcite and leave behind an exquisitely preserved quartz fossil .
Some fossils form when their remains are compressed by high pressure , leaving behind a dark imprint .
Compression is most common for fossils of leaves and ferns , but can occur with other organisms .
The study of the universe is called cosmology .
The universe contains all of the star systems , galaxies , gas , and dust , plus all the matter and energy that exists now , that existed in the past , and that will exist in the future .
The universe includes all of space and time .
What did the ancient Greeks recognize as the universe ?
In their model , the universe contained Earth at the center , the Sun , the Moon , five planets , and a sphere to which all the stars were attached .
Edwin Hubble demonstrated the existence of galaxies .
This idea held for many centuries until Galileos telescope helped people recognize that Earth is not the center of the universe .
In the early 20th century , an astronomer named Edwin Hubble -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- discovered that what scientists called the Andromeda Nebula was actually over 2 million light years away many times farther than the farthest distances that had ever been measured .
Hubble realized that many of the objects that astronomers called nebulas were not actually clouds of gas , but were collections of millions or billions of stars what we now call galaxies .
Hubble showed that the universe was much larger than our own galaxy .
Today , we know that the universe contains about a hundred billion galaxies about the same number of galaxies as there are stars in the Milky Way Galaxy .
-LRB- a -RRB- Edwin Hubble used the 100-inch reflecting telescope at the Mount Wilson Observatory in California to show that some distant specks of light were galaxies .
Uranus -LRB- YOOR-uh-nuhs -RRB- is named for the Greek god of the sky .
William Herschel first discovered the planet in 1781 .
Light from the Sun takes about 2 hours and 40 minutes to reach Uranus .
Like Jupiter and Saturn , Uranus is composed mainly of hydrogen and helium , with an outer gas layer that gives way to liquid on the inside .
When sunlight reflects off Uranus , clouds of methane filter out red light , giving the planet a blue-green color .
There are bands of clouds in the atmosphere of Uranus , but they are hard to see in normal light , so the planet looks like a plain blue ball .
Most of the planets in the solar system rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the Sun .
In other words , it rotates like a top that was turned so that it was spinning parallel to the floor .
Scientists think that Uranus was probably knocked over by a collision with another planet-sized object billions of years ago .
Uranus has 27 known moons and all but a few of them are named for characters from the plays of William Shakespeare .
The five biggest moons of Uranus Miranda , Ariel , Umbriel , Titania , and Oberon are shown in Figure 1.2 .
These Voyager 2 photos have been resized to show the relative sizes of the five main moons of Uranus .
Humans use six times as much water today as they did 100 years ago .
People living in developed countries use a far greater proportion of the worlds water than people in less developed countries .
What do people use all of that water for ?
Besides drinking and washing , people need water for agriculture , industry , household uses , and recreation -LRB- Figure Water use can be consumptive or non-consumptive , depending on whether the water is lost to the ecosystem .
Non-consumptive water use includes water that can be recycled and reused .
For example , the water that goes down the drain and enters the sewer system is purified and then redistributed for reuse .
By recycling water , the overall water consumption is reduced .
Consumptive water use takes the water out of the ecosystem .
Some of the worlds farmers still farm without irrigation by choosing crops that match the amount of rain that falls in their area .
For farmers to avoid years in which they produce little or no food , many of the worlds crops are produced using irrigation .
Water used for home , industrial , and agricultural purposes in different regions .
Trench irrigation : canals carry water from a water source to the fields .
Flood irrigation : fields are flooded with water .
Between 15 % and 36 % percent of the water never reaches the crops because it evaporates or leaves the fields as runoff .
Water that runs off a field often takes valuable soil with it .
With drip irrigation , pipes and tubes deliver small amounts of water directly to the soil at the roots of each plant or tree .
The water is not sprayed into the air or over the ground , so nearly all of it goes directly into the soil and plant roots .
Why do farmers use wasteful irrigation methods when water-efficient methods are available ?
Many farmers and farming corporations have not switched to more efficient irrigation methods for two reasons : 1 .
In the United States and some other countries , the government pays for much of the cost of the water that is used for agriculture .
Because farmers do not pay the full cost of their water use , they do not have any financial incentive to use less water .
What ideas can you come up with to encourage farmers to use more efficient irrigation systems ?
Aquaculture is farming to raise fish , shellfish , algae , or aquatic plants -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
As the supplies of fish from lakes , rivers , and the oceans dwindle , people are getting more fish from aquaculture .
Raising fish increases our food resources and is especially valuable where protein sources are limited .
Farmed fish are becoming increasingly common in grocery stores all over the world .
Growing fish in a large scale requires that the fish stocks are healthy and protected from predators .
The species raised must be hearty , inexpensive to feed , and able to reproduce in captivity .
Wastes must be flushed out to keep animals healthy .
But for other species , aqua - culture can cause problems .
Natural landscapes , such as mangroves , which are rich ecosystems and also protect coastlines from storm damage , may be lost to fish farms -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
For fish farmers , keeping costs down may be a problem since coastal land may be expensive and labor costs may be high .
Large predatory fish at the 4th or 5th trophic level must eat a lot , so feeding large numbers of these fish is expensive and environmentally costly .
Farmed fish are genetically different from wild stocks , and if they escape into the wild they may cause problems for native fish .
Because the organisms live so close together , parasites are common and may also escape into the wild .
Shrimp farms on the coast of Ecuador are shown as blue rectangles .
Mangrove forests , salt flats , and salt marshes have been converted to shrimp farms .
Industrial water use accounts for an estimated 15 % of worldwide water use , with a much greater percentage in developed nations .
Industrial uses of water include power plants that use water to cool their equipment and oil refineries that use water for chemical processes .
You need to count the water you drink , cook with , bathe in , garden with , let run down the drain , or flush down the toilet .
In developed countries , people use a lot of water , while in less developed countries people use much less .
Globally , household or personal water use is estimated to account for 15 % of world-wide water use .
Some household water uses are non-consumptive , because water is recaptured in sewer systems , treated , and returned to surface water supplies for reuse .
People love water for swimming , fishing , boating , river rafting , and other activates .
Even activities such as golf , where there may not be any standing water , require plenty of water to make the grass on the course green .
Despite its value , the amount of water that most recreational activities use is low : less than 1 % of all the water we use .
Golf courses are the biggest recreational water consumer since they require large amounts for irrigation , especially because many courses are located in warm , sunny , desert regions where water is scarce and evaporation is high .
Environmental use of water includes creating wildlife habitat .
Lakes are built to create places for fish and water birds -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
Venus thick clouds reflect sunlight well , so Venus is very bright .
When Venus rises just before the Sun rises , the bright object is called the morning star .
When it sets just after the Sun sets , it is the evening star .
But the resemblance between the two inner planets ends there .
Venus is covered by a thick layer of clouds , as shown in pictures of Venus taken at ultraviolet wavelengths -LRB- Figure This ultraviolet image from the Pioneer Venus Orbiter shows thick layers of clouds in the atmosphere of Venus .
Venus clouds are not made of water vapor like Earths clouds .
Clouds on Venus are made mostly of carbon dioxide Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The dense atmosphere totally obscures the surface of Venus , even from spacecraft orbiting the planet .
Since spacecraft can not see through the thick atmosphere , radar is used to map Venus surface .
Many features found on the surface are similar to Earth and yet are very different .
The reddish-orange color is close to what scientists think the color of sunlight would look like on the surface of Venus .
Venus also has very few impact craters compared with Mercury and the Moon .
Its difficult for scientists to figure out the geological history of Venus .
The environment is too harsh for a rover to go there .
It is even more difficult for students to figure out the geological history of a distant planet based on the information given here .
On Earth , volcanism is generated because the planets interior is hot .
Figure 1.3 shows a topographical map of Venus produced by the Magellan probe using radar .
Much of the volcanic activity is caused by plate tectonic activity .
Because the density of impact craters can be used to determine how old a planets surface is , the small number of impact craters means that Venus surface is young .
Scientists think that there is frequent , planet-wide resurfacing of Venus with volcanism taking place in many locations .
The cause is heat that builds up below the surface , which has no escape until finally it destroys the crust and results in volcanoes .
This false color image of Venus was made from radar data collected by the Magellan probe between 1990 and 1994 .
Most of the volcanoes are no longer active , but scientists have found evidence that there is some active volcanism -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Water is unevenly distributed around the world .
Large portions of the world , such as much of northern Africa , receive very little water relative to their population -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The map shows the number of months in which there is little rainfall in each region .
In developed nations , water is stored , but in underdeveloped nations , water storage may be minimal .
Over time , as population grows , rainfall totals will change , resulting in less water per person in some regions .
In 2025 , many nations , even developed nations , are projected to have less water per person than now
Water scarcity is a problem now and will become an even larger problem in the future as water sources are reduced or polluted and population grows .
In 1995 , about 40 % of the worlds population faced water scarcity .
Scientists estimate that by the year 2025 , nearly half of the worlds people wont have enough water to meet their daily needs .
Nearly one-quarter of the worlds people will have less than 500 m3 of water to use in an entire year .
That amount is less water in a year than some people in the United States use in one day .
Droughts occur when a region experiences unusually low precipitation for months or years -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Periods of drought may create or worsen water shortages .
Human activities can contribute to the frequency and duration of droughts .
For example , deforestation keeps trees from returning water to the atmosphere by transpiration ; part of the water cycle becomes broken .
Extended periods with lower than normal rainfall cause droughts .
Global warming will change patterns of rainfall and water distribution .
As the Earth warms , regions that currently receive an adequate supply of rain may shift .
Regions that rely on snowmelt may find that there is less snow and the melt comes earlier and faster in the spring , causing the water to run off and not be available through the dry summers .
A change in temperature and precipitation would completely change the types of plants and animals that can live successfully in that region .
Without adequate water , crops and livestock dwindle and people go hungry .
Industry , construction , and economic development is halted , causing a nation to sink further into poverty .
The risk of regional conflicts over scarce water resources rises .
People die from diseases , thirst , or even in war over scarce resources .
Californias population is growing by hundreds of thousands of people a year , but much of the state receives as much annual rainfall as Morocco .
With fish populations crashing , global warming , and the demands of the countrys largest agricultural industry , the pressures on our water supply are increasing .
As water supplies become scarce , conflicts will arise between the individuals or nations that have enough clean water and those that do not -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Water disputes may add to tensions between countries where differing national interests and withdrawal rights have been in conflict .
Water disputes are happening along 260 different river systems that cross national boundaries .
International water laws , such as the Helsinki Rules , help interpret water rights among countries .
Many regions already experience water scarcity .
This map shows the number of months in which the amount of water that is used exceeds the availability of water that can be used sustainably .
This is projected to get worse as demand increases .
Water pollution contributes to water shortages by making some water sources unavailable for use .
In underdeveloped countries , raw sewage is dumped into the same water that people drink and bathe in .
Even in developed countries , water pollution affects human and environmental health .
Water pollution includes any contaminant that gets into lakes , streams , and oceans .
In developed countries , the three main sources of water pollution are described below .
Wastewater from cities and towns contains many different contaminants from many different homes , businesses , and industries -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Contaminants come from : Sewage disposal -LRB- some sewage is inadequately treated or untreated -RRB- .
Boats that dump sewage .
Large numbers of sewage spills into San Francisco Bay are forcing cities , water agencies and the public to take a closer look at wastewater and its impacts on the health of the bay .
QUEST investigates the causes of the spills and whats being done to prevent them .
Factories and hospitals spew pollutants into the air and waterways -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Some of the most hazardous industrial pollutants include : Radioactive substances from nuclear power plants and medical and scientific sources .
Runoff from crops , livestock , and poultry farming carries contaminants such as fertilizers , pesticides , and animal waste into nearby waterways -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Soil and silt also run off farms .
Animal wastes may carry harmful diseases , particularly in the developing world .
The high density of animals in a factory farm means that runoff from the area is full of pollutants .
Weathering is the process that changes solid rock into sediments .
Sediments were described in the chapter `` Ma - terials of Earths Crust . ''
Once these sediments are separated from the rocks , erosion is the process that moves the sediments .
While plate tectonics forces work to build huge mountains and other landscapes , the forces of weathering gradually wear those rocks and landscapes away .
Together with erosion , tall mountains turn into hills and even plains .
No human being can watch for millions of years as mountains are built , nor can anyone watch as those same mountains gradually are worn away .
What forces of weathering wear down that road , or rocks or mountains over time ?
Wegener put his idea and his evidence together in his book The Origin of Continents and Oceans , first published in 1915 .
New editions with additional evidence were published later in the decade .
In his book he said that around 300 million years ago the continents had all been joined into a single landmass he called Pangaea , meaning all earth in ancient Greek .
The supercontinent later broke apart and the continents having been moving into their current positions ever since .
Wegeners idea seemed so outlandish at the time that he was ridiculed by other scientists .
Scientists at the time calculated that centrifugal and tidal forces were too weak to move continents .
When one scientist did calculations that assumed that these forces were strong enough to move continents , his result was that if Earth had such strong forces the planet would stop rotating in less than one year .
In addition , scientists also thought that the continents that had been plowing through the ocean basins should be much more deformed than they are .
Wegener answered his question of whether Africa and South America had once been joined .
But a hypothesis is rarely accepted without a mechanism to drive it .
A very few scientists did , since his hypothesis elegantly explained the similar fossils and rocks on opposite sides of the ocean , but most did not .
To his colleagues , his greatest problem was that he had no plausible mechanism for how the continents could move through the oceans .
Based on his polar experiences , Wegener suggested that the continents were like icebreaking ships plowing through ice sheets .
The continents moved by centrifugal and tidal forces .
As Wegeners colleague , how would you go about showing whether these forces could move continents ?
Alfred Wegener suggested that continen - tal drift occurred as continents cut through the ocean floor , in the same way as this icebreaker plows through sea ice .
Early hypotheses proposed that centrifu - gal forces moved continents .
This is the same force that moves the swings out - ward on a spinning carnival ride .
Another of We - geners colleagues , Arthur Holmes , elaborated on Wegeners idea that there is thermal convection in the mantle .
In a convection cell , material deep beneath the surface is heated so that its density is lowered and it rises .
Near the surface it becomes cooler and denser , so it sinks .
Holmes thought this could be like a conveyor belt .
Where two adjacent convection cells rise to the surface , a continent could break apart with pieces moving in opposite directions .
Alfred Wegener died in 1930 on an expedition on the Greenland icecap .
For the most part the continental drift idea was put to rest for a few decades , until technological advances presented even more evidence that the continents moved and gave scientists the tools to develop a mechanism for Wegeners drifting continents .
Waves have been discussed in previous concepts in several contexts : seismic waves traveling through the planet , sound waves traveling through seawater , and ocean waves eroding beaches .
Waves transfer energy , and the size of a wave and the distance it travels depends on the amount of energy that it carries .
Ocean waves originate from wind blowing - steady winds or high storm winds - over the water .
What factors create the largest ocean waves ?
The largest wind waves form when the wind is very strong blows steadily for a long time blows over a long distance The wind could be strong , but if it gusts for just a short time , large waves wont form .
The energy first creates tiny ripples , which make an uneven surface for the wind to catch so that it may create larger waves .
These waves travel across the ocean out of the area where the wind is blowing .
Do you think the same molecules of water that start out in a wave in the middle of the ocean later arrive at the shore ?
The molecules are not the same , but the energy is transferred across the ocean .
Water molecules in waves make circles or ellipses -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Energy transfers between molecules , but the molecules themselves mostly bob up and down in place .
The circles show the motion of a water molecule in a wind wave .
Wave energy is greatest at the surface and decreases with depth .
`` A '' shows that a water molecule travels in a circular motion in deep water .
`` B '' shows that molecules in shallow water travel in an elliptical path because of the ocean bottom .
Do waves only break when they reach shore ?
Waves break when they become too tall to be supported by their base .
This can happen at sea but happens predictably as a wave moves up a shore .
The energy at the bottom of the wave is lost by friction with the ground , so that the bottom of the wave slows down but the top of the wave continues at the same speed .
The crest falls over and crashes down .
Water piles up at a shoreline as storm winds push waves into the coast .
Storm surge may raise sea level as much as 7.5 m -LRB- 25 ft -RRB- , which can be devastating in a shallow land area when winds , waves , and rain are intense .
Learning how they are generated can tell scientists a great deal about how the ocean creates waves and especially large waves .
The discovery of cells led to the cell theory .
However , no one knew bacteria even existed until they could be seen with a microscope .
The invention of the microscope allowed scientists to see cells , bacteria , and many other structures that are too small to be seen with the unaided eye .
The microscope was invented more than four centuries ago .
In the late 1500s , two Dutch eyeglass makers , Zacharias Jansen and his father Hans , built the first microscope .
They put several magnifying lenses in a tube .
They discovered that using more than one lens magnified objects more than a single lens .
Their simple microscope could make small objects appear nine times bigger than they really were .
In the mid-1600s , the English scientist Robert Hooke was one of the first scientists to observe living things with a microscope .
One of Hookes most important discoveries came when he viewed thin slices of cork under a microscope .
Cork is made from the bark of a tree .
When Hooke viewed it under a microscope , he saw many tiny compartments that he called cells .
Hooke was the first person to observe the cells from a once-living organism .
In the late 1600s , Anton van Leeuwenhoek , a Dutch lens maker and scientist , started making much stronger microscopes .
His microscopes could magnify objects as much as 270 times their actual size .
Van Leeuwenhoek made many scientific discoveries using his microscopes .
He also saw yeast cells , human sperm cells , and the microscopic life teeming in a drop of pond water .
He even saw blood cells circulating in tiny blood vessels called capillaries .
The drawings in Figure 1.12 show some of tiny organisms and living cells that van Leeuwenhoek viewed with his microscopes .
These early microscopes used lenses to refract light and create magnified images .
This type of microscope is called a light microscope .
MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
To view smaller objects , a different type of microscope , such as an electron microscope , must be used .
Electron microscopes pass beams of electrons through or across an object .
An electron microscope was used to make the image of the ant head in Figure 1.10 .
Light microscopes continued to improve and are still used today .
The most powerful light microscopes now available can make objects look up to 2000 times their actual size .
You can learn how to use a light microscope by watching this short video : http MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : To see what you might observe with a light microscope , watch the following video .
Flatworms are invertebrates that belong to Phylum Platyhelminthes .
Flatworms have a flat body because they lack a fluid-filled body cavity .
Watch this amazing flatworm video to learn about some of the other firsts these simple animals achieved , including being the first hunters : http://shapeoflife.org/video/flatworms-first-hunter MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
However , flatworms represent several evolutionary advances in invertebrates .
The mesoderm layer allows flatworms to develop muscle tissues so they can move easily over solid surfaces .
Flatworms reproduce sexually .
In most species , the same individuals produce both eggs and sperm .
After fertilization occurs , the fertilized eggs pass out of the adults body and hatch into larvae .
The final larval stage develops into the adult form .
Some flatworms live in water or moist soil .
Other flatworms , such as tapeworms , are parasites that live inside vertebrate hosts .
Usually , more than one type of host is needed to complete the parasites life cycle , as shown in Figure 12.12 .
Roundworms range in length from less than 1 millimeter to over 7 meters in length .
This is one way that roundworms differ from flatworms .
This allows the buildup of fluid pressure in their partial body cavity .
The fluid pressure adds stiffness to the body .
This provides a counterforce for the contraction of muscles , allowing roundworms to move easily over surfaces .
Roundworms reproduce sexually .
Fertilization takes place inside the female organism .
Females lay huge numbers of eggs , sometimes as many as 100,000 per day !
The eggs hatch into larvae , which develop into adults .
Free-living worms are found mainly in freshwater habitats .
Hookworm larvae enter the host through the skin .
Female adults lay large quantities of eggs .
Eggs pass out of the host in feces .
Some live in moist soil .
Several roundworm species infect humans .
Hookworms are named for the hooks they use to grab onto the hosts intestines .
In addition to snails , mollusks include squids , slugs , scallops , and clams .
The largest mollusk , the colossal squid , may be as long as a school bus and weigh over half a ton !
This is a feeding organ with teeth made of chitin .
It is secreted by special tissue called mantle on the outer surface of the body .
The shell covers the top of the body and encloses the internal organs .
The head may have tentacles for sensing the environment and grasping food .
Mollusks generally have a muscular foot , which may be used for walking or other purposes .
Mollusks reproduce sexually .
Fertilization may be internal or external , depending on the species .
Fertilized eggs develop into larvae .
However , the majority of species live in the ocean .
Mollusks are also eaten by many other organisms , including humans .
To learn more about the amazing diversity and adaptations of annelids , watch this excellent video : http://shapeoflife.org/video/annelids-powerful-and-capable-worms MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
This allows the animal to move very efficiently .
Some segments can also be specialized to carry out particular functions .
For example , they might have tentacles for sensing or feeding , paddles for swimming , or suckers for clinging to surfaces .
These include a : circulatory system ; excretory system ; complete digestive system ; and nervous system , with a brain and sensory organs .
Most annelids can reproduce both asexually and sexually .
Asexual reproduction may occur by budding or fission .
Sexual reproduction varies by species .
Some species go through a larval stage before developing into adults .
Other species grow to adult size without going through a larval stage .
Annelids live in a diversity of freshwater , salt-water , and terrestrial habitats .
Some annelids , such as earthworms , eat soil and extract organic material from it .
Annelids called leeches are either predators or parasites .
Some leeches capture and eat other invertebrates .
Annelids called polychaete worms live on the ocean floor .
Some invertebrates also have these traits and are classified as chordates .
The main trait that sets vertebrates apart from invertebrate chordates is their vertebral column , or backbone .
As you can see in Figure 13.2 the vertebral column runs from head to tail along the dorsal -LRB- top -RRB- side of the body .
The vertebral column helps the vertebrate body hold its shape .
In addition to the vertebral column , the vertebrate endoskeleton includes : a cranium , or bony skull , that encloses and protects the brain ; two pairs of limbs -LRB- in humans , arms and legs -RRB- ; limb girdles that connect the limbs to the rest of the endoskeleton -LRB- in humans , shoulders and hips -RRB- .
The vertebrate endoskeleton is made of bone and cartilage .
Cartilage is a tough , flexible tissue that contains a protein called collagen .
Bone is a hard tissue consisting of a collagen framework that is filled in with minerals such as calcium .
A bony endoskeleton allows an animal to grow larger and heavier than a cartilage endoskeleton would .
Bone also provides more protection for soft tissues and internal organs .
Most vertebrates share several other traits .
The majority of vertebrates have : scales , feathers , fur , or hair covering their skin ; muscles attached to the endoskeleton to allow movement ; a circulatory system with a heart that pumps blood through a closed network of blood vessels ; an excretory system that includes a pair of kidneys for filtering wastes out of the blood ; a central nervous system with a brain , spinal cord , and nerve fibers throughout the body ; an adaptive immune system that learns to recognize specific pathogens and launch tailor-made attacks against them ; and an endocrine system with glands that secrete chemical messenger molecules called hormones .
Vertebrates reproduce sexually .
Birth may be followed by a period of parental care of the offspring .
This reproductive strategy occurs in almost all mammals including humans .
Ovovivipary refers to the development of an embryo inside an egg within the mothers body .
The egg remains inside the mothers body until it hatches , but the mother provides no nourishment to the developing embryo inside the egg .
Vivipary refers to the development and nourishment of an embryo within the mothers body but not inside an egg .
coelacanth Amphibians They have a bony endoskeleton with a backbone and jaws ; they have gills as larvae and lungs as adults ; they have four limbs ; they are ectothermic frog Reptiles They have a bony endoskeleton with a backbone and jaws ; they breathe only with lungs ; they have four limbs ; their skin is covered with scales ; they have amniotic eggs ; they are ectothermic .
alligator Class Birds Distinguishing Traits They have a bony endoskeleton with a backbone but no jaws ; they breathe only with lungs ; they have four limbs , with the two front limbs modified as wings ; their skin is cov - ered with feathers ; they have amni - otic eggs ; they are endothermic .
Example bird Mammals They have a bony endoskeleton with a backbone and jaws ; they breathe only with lungs ; they have four limbs ; their skin is covered with hair or fur ; they have am - niotic eggs ; they have mammary -LRB- milk-producing -RRB- glands ; they are endothermic .
Class Hagfish Distinguishing Traits They have a cranium but no back - bone ; they do not have jaws ; their endoskeleton is made of cartilage ; they are ectothermic .
Example hagfish Class Lampreys Distinguishing Traits They have a partial backbone ; they do not have jaws ; their endoskele - ton is made of cartilage ; they are ectothermic .
Example lamprey Cartilaginous Fish They have a complete backbone ; they have jaws ; their endoskeleton is made of cartilage ; they are ec - tothermic .
shark Ray-Finned Fish They have a backbone and jaws ; their endoskeleton is made of bones ; they have thin , bony fins ; they are ectothermic .
perch Lobe-Finned Fish They have a backbone and jaws ; their endoskeleton is made of bones ; they have thick , fleshy fins ; they are ectothermic .
The tree diagram in Figure 13.4 summarizes how vertebrates evolved from that time forward .
The earliest fish had an endoskeleton made of cartilage rather than bone .
The first fish with a complete vertebral column evolved about 450 million years ago .
About 400 million years ago , the first fish with a bony endoskeleton evolved .
A bony skeleton could support a bigger body .
Early bony fish evolved into modern ray-finned fish and lobe-finned fish .
The earliest amphibians evolved from a lobe-finned fish ancestor .
This occurred about 365 million years ago .
The first mammals appeared about 200 million years ago .
The earliest birds evolved about 150 million years ago .
The earliest reptiles evolved from an amphibian ancestor .
This occurred at least 300 million years ago .
Reptiles were the first vertebrates that did not need water to reproduce .
These eggs allowed the embryo inside to breathe without drying out .
Mammals and birds both evolved from reptile-like ancestors .
Ectothermy means controlling body temperature to just a limited extent from the outside by changing behavior .
For example , on a cold day , an endotherm may produce more body heat by increasing its rate of metabolism .
On a hot day , it may give off more heat by increasing blood flow to the surface of the body .
That way , some of the heat can radiate into the air from the bodys surface .
Endothermy requires more energy -LRB- and food -RRB- than ectothermy .
However , it allows the animal to stay active regardless of the temperature outside .
You can learn more about how vertebrates regulate their temperature by watching this video : .
For example , an ectotherm might stay in the shade to keep cool on a hot , sunny day .
On a cold day , an ectotherm might bask in the sun to warm up , like the snake in Figure 13.5 .
In cold weather , an ectotherm cools down .
As its body temperature drops , its metabolism slows down and it becomes inactive .
Both mammals and birds evolved endothermy .
Endothermy means controlling body temperature within a narrow range from the inside through biochemical or physical means .
For a video introduction to aquatic adaptations of fish , go to this link : .
This reduces water resistance .
Fins function like paddles or rudders .
They help fish swim and navigate in the water .
This is a balloon-like organ containing gas .
By inflating or deflating their swim bladder , fish can rise or sink in the water .
URL : Fish are covered with scales .
Scales are overlapping tissues , like shingles on a roof .
They also provide a flexible covering that lets fish move their body to swim .
Gills are organs behind the head that absorb oxygen from water .
Water enters through the mouth , passes over the gills , and then exits the body .
Fish with jaws use their jaws and teeth to chew food before swallowing it .
This allows them to eat larger prey animals .
Fish brains are small compared with the brains of other vertebrates .
Fish also have highly developed sense organs .
Each fish typically produces large numbers of sperm or eggs .
The embryo develops in an egg outside the mothers body .
Many species of fish reproduce by spawning .
Spawning occurs when many adult fish group together and release their sperm or eggs into the water at the same time .
Some species of fish carry their fertilized eggs in their mouth until they
It typically results in a large number of embryos forming at once .
This makes it more likely that at least some of the embryos will avoid being eaten by predators .
You can watch trout spawning in Yellowstone Park in this interesting video : http://video.nationalgeographic.com/video/trout_spawning MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : With spawning , fish parents cant identify their own offspring .
Each larva swims around attached to a yolk sac from the egg -LRB- see Figure 13.9 -RRB- .
The yolk sac provides it with food .
Fish larvae look different from adult fish of the same species .
Lampreys lack scales but have fins and a partial backbone .
Their mouth is surrounded by a large round sucker with teeth .
They use the sucker to suck the blood of other fish .
Example hagfish Cartilaginous fish include sharks , rays , and ratfish .
Their endoskele - ton is made of cartilage instead of bone .
The classes are commonly called hagfish , lampreys , cartilaginous fish , ray-finned fish , and lobe-finned fish .
Their fins consist of webs of skin over flexible bony spines , called rays .
Lobe-finned fish include only coelacanths and lungfish .
They are bony fish with an endoskeleton made of bone .
Their fleshy fins contain bone and muscle .
Lungfish are named for a lung-like organ that they can use for breathing air .
This makes them slippery , so they can slip out of the jaws of predators .
Fish vary in the types of places they live and what they eat .
Many fish live in the salt water of the ocean .
Cartilaginous fish , such as sharks , mainly live in the ocean .
Their jaws and teeth allow them to eat large prey .
Bony fish , such as ray-finned or lobe-finned fish , may live in salt water or fresh water .
To see how one species of predatory bony fish catches its prey , watch this amazing video : http://video.nationalgeographic.com/video/stonefish - MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Other fish live in freshwater lakes , ponds , rivers , or streams .
Most fish are predators , but they may differ in their prey and how they get it .
Lampreys generally live in shallow water , either salty or fresh .
Human cells are organized into tissues , tissues are organized into organs , and organs are organized into organ systems .
The average human adult consists of an incredible 100 trillion cells !
Each cell must carry out basic life processes in order to survive and help keep the body alive .
Most human cells also have characteristics for carrying out other , special functions .
For example , muscle cells have extra mitochondria to provide the energy needed to move the body .
To learn more about specialized human cells and what they do , watch this video : .
Specialized cells are organized into tissues .
A tissue is a group of specialized cells of the same kind that perform the same function .
Epithelial tissue protects the body and its internal organs .
Muscle tissue consists of cells that can contract , or shorten .
Examples include skeletal muscle , which is attached to bones and makes them move .
Other types of muscle include cardiac muscle , which makes the heart beat , and smooth muscle , which is found in other internal organs .
Nervous tissue consists of nerve cells , or neurons , which can send and receive electrical messages .
Nervous tissue makes up the brain , spinal cord , and other nerves that run throughout the body .
The four types are shown in Figure 16.2 .
Connective tissue consists of cells that form the bodys structure .
Examples include bone and cartilage , which protect and support the body .
Epithelial tissue consists of cells that cover inner and outer body surfaces .
Examples include skin and the linings of internal organs .
The four types of tissues make up all the organs of the human body .
An organ is a structure composed of two or more types of tissues that work together to perform the same function .
Examples of human organs include the skin , brain , lungs , kidneys , and heart .
Consider the heart as an example .
Figure 16.3 shows how all four tissue types work together to make the heart pump blood .
Human organs are organized into organ systems .
An organ system is a group of organs that work together to carry out a complex function .
The circulatory system also includes the blood vessels and blood .
The organ systems of the body work together to carry out life processes and maintain homeostasis .
The body is in homeostasis when its internal environment is kept more-or-less constant .
Instead , the water is returned to the blood to keep water levels from falling lower .
Cells may not get everything they need , or toxic wastes may build up in the body .
For example , levels of sugar , carbon dioxide , and water in the blood must be kept within narrow ranges .
This requires continuous adjustments .
For example : After you eat and digest a sugary snack , the level of sugar in your blood quickly rises .
In response , the endocrine system secretes the hormone insulin .
Insulin helps cells absorb sugar from the blood .
This causes the level of sugar in the blood to fall back to its normal level .
The level of water in the blood may fall too low .
From the outside , the skin looks plain and simple , as you can see in Figure 16.5 .
A single square inch of skin contains about 20 blood vessels , hundreds of sweat glands , and more than a thousand nerve endings .
For a dramatic introduction to the skin , watch this video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Although it is very thin , it consists of two distinct layers , called the epidermis and the dermis .
Refer to the figure as you read about the epidermis and dermis below .
As they move , they produce the tough , fibrous protein called keratin .
By the time the cells reach the surface , they have filled with keratin and died .
On the surface , the dead cells form a protective , waterproof layer .
Dead cells are gradually shed from the surface of the epidermis .
As they are shed , they are replaced by other dead cells that move up from below .
The epidermis also contains cells called melanocytes .
You can see a melanocyte in Figure 16.7 .
Melanocytes produce melanin .
Melanin is a brown pigment that gives skin much of its color .
However , the melanocytes of people with darker skin produce more melanin .
The more light you get , the more melanin your melanocytes produce .
This explains why skin tans when its exposed to sunlight .
The cells at the bottom of the epidermis are always dividing by mitosis to form new cells .
The new cells gradually move up through the epidermis toward the surface of the body .
Each hair grows out of a follicle , passes up through the epidermis , and extends above the skin surface .
Sebaceous glands are commonly called oil glands .
They produce an oily substance called sebum .
Sebum is secreted into hair follicles .
Then it makes its way along the hair shaft to the surface of the skin .
Sebum waterproofs the hair and skin and helps prevent them from drying out .
Sweat glands produce the salty fluid known as sweat .
Sweat contains excess water , salts , and other waste products .
Each sweat gland has a duct that passes through the epidermis .
Sweat travels from the gland through the duct and out through a pore on the surface of the skin .
The dermis is attached to the epidermis by fibers made of the protein collagen .
If you cut your skin and it bleeds , the cut has penetrated the dermis and damaged a blood vessel .
The cut probably hurts as well because of the nerve endings in this skin layer .
The dermis also contains hair follicles and two types of glands .
You can see some of these structures in Figure 16.8 .
Hair follicles are structures where hairs originate .
Sweat from sweat glands in the skin evaporates to cool the body .
Blood vessels in the skin dilate , or widen , increasing blood flow to the body surface .
This allows more heat to reach the surface and radiate into the environment .
The opposite happens to retain body heat .
Blood vessels in the skin constrict , or narrow , decreasing blood flow to the body surface .
This reduces the amount of heat that reaches the surface so less heat is lost to the environment .
The main function of the skin is controlling what enters and leaves the body .
It also prevents bacteria and other microorganisms from entering the body .
Melanin in the epidermis absorbs ultraviolet light .
This prevents the light from reaching and damaging the dermis .
The skin helps maintain a constant body temperature .
The most important step you can take is to protect your skin from sun exposure .
It happens when the sebaceous glands secrete too much sebum .
The excess oil provides a good place for bacteria to grow .
Keeping the skin clean helps prevent acne .
Over-the-counter products or prescription drugs may be needed if the problem is serious or doesnt clear up on its own .
On sunny days , wear long sleeves and pants and a hat with a brim .
Also apply sunscreen to exposed areas of skin .
Protecting your skin in these ways will reduce damage to your skin by ultraviolet light .
This is important because skin that has been damaged by ultraviolet light is at greater risk of developing skin cancer .
About 85 percent of teens develop acne , like the boy in Figure 16.9 .
Acne is a condition in which pimples form on the skin .
However , like the skin , the hair and nails also play important roles in helping the body maintain homeostasis .
Hair is a fiber made mainly of the tough protein keratin .
The cells of each hair are filled with keratin and no longer alive .
The dead cells overlap each other , almost like shingles on a roof .
Head hair helps protect the scalp from sun exposure .
Hair in eyelashes and eyebrows helps keep water and dust out of the eyes .
Hairs inside the nostrils of the nose trap dust and germs in the air so they cant reach the lungs .
Fingernails and toenails are made of specialized cells that grow out of the epidermis .
The keratin makes them tough and hard .
They also make it easier to feel things with the sensitive fingertips by acting as a counterforce when things are handled .
In adults , the skeleton consists of a whopping 206 bones , many of them in the hands and feet .
The skeletal system also includes cartilage and ligaments .
Cartilage is a tough , flexible connective tissue that contains the protein collagen .
Ligaments connect bones of the skeleton and hold them together .
Your skeletal system supports your body and gives it shape .
For example , the skull surrounds and protects the brain .
The ribs protect the heart and lungs .
The skeletal system makes blood cells .
Most blood cells are produced inside certain types of bones .
The skeletal system stores calcium and helps maintain normal levels of calcium in the blood .
Bones take up and store calcium when blood levels of calcium are high .
The skeletal system works with muscles to move the body .
Try to walk without bending your knees and youll see how important the skeletal system is for movement .
The skeletal system protects the soft organs of the body .
Some people think bones are like chalk : dead , dry , and brittle .
Spongy bone contains many tiny holes , or pores , which provide spaces for blood vessels and bone marrow .
Bone marrow makes blood cells .
There are four different kinds of tissues in bones , as shown in Figure 16.11 .
Periosteum is a tough , fibrous membrane that covers and protects the outer surfaces of bone .
Compact bone lies below periosteum .
Compact bone gives bones their strength .
Spongy bone lies below compact bone .
Early in the development of a human fetus , the skeleton is made entirely of cartilage .
The relatively soft cartilage gradually changes to hard bone through ossification .
This is a process in which mineral deposits replace cartilage in bone .
At birth , several areas of cartilage remain , including the ends of the long bones in the arms and legs .
This allows these bones to keep growing in length during childhood .
By the late teens or early twenties , all of the cartilage has been replaced by bone .
Bones can not grow in length after this point has been reached .
However , bones can continue to grow in width .
Weight-bearing activities such as weight lifting can increase growth in bone width .
A joint is a place where two or more bones of the skeleton meet .
There are three different types of joints based on the degree to which they allow movement of the bones : immovable , partly movable , and movable joints .
In these joints , the bones are connected by ligaments .
The space between the bones is also filled with a liquid called synovial fluid .
Move these three joints in your own skeleton to experience the range of motion each allows .
Immovable joints do not allow the bones to move at all .
In these joints , the bones are fused together by very tough collagen .
Examples of immovable joints include the joints between bones of the skull .
Partly movable joints allow very limited movement .
In these joints , the bones are held together by cartilage , which is more flexible than collagen .
Examples of partly moveable joints include the bones of the rib cage .
Movable joints allow the greatest movement and are the most common .
What you eat as a teen can affect how healthy your skeletal system is not only now but also in the future .
Osteoporosis is a disease in which the bones become porous and weak because they do not contain enough calcium .
The graph in Figure 16.14 shows how the mass of calcium in bone peaks around age 30 and declines after that , especially in women .
Maximizing the calcium in your bones while youre young will reduce your risk of developing osteoporosis later in of life .
People with osteoporosis have an increased risk of bone fractures .
This could happen in a car crash or while playing a sport .
Wearing a seatbelt when you ride in a motor vehicle and wearing safety gear when you play sports may help prevent bone fractures .
Bone fractures heal naturally as new bone tissue forms at the site of the fracture .
However , the bone may have to be placed in a cast or have rods or screws inserted into it to keep it correctly aligned until it heals .
The healing process usually takes several weeks or even months .
A sprain is a strain or tear in a ligament that has been twisted or stretched too far .
Athletes often strain a ligament in the knee called the ACL .
Warming up adequately and stretching before playing sports may reduce the risk of a sprain .
Ligament injuries can take a long time to heal .
Rest , ice , compression , and elevation of the sprained area may help the healing process .
Muscles are composed primarily of cells called muscle fibers .
It contains multiple nuclei and many mitochondria , which produce ATP for energy .
It also contains many organelles called myofibrils .
Myofibrils allow muscles to contract , or shorten .
Each myofibril is made up of two types of proteins , called actin and myosin .
These proteins form thread-like filaments .
The myosin filaments use energy from ATP to pull on the actin filaments .
This causes the actin filaments to slide over the myosin filaments and shorten a section of the myofibril .
You can see a simple animation of the process at this link : http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Actin_Myosin.gif The sliding-and-shortening process occurs all along many myofibrils and in many muscle fibers .
All three types consist mainly of muscle fibers , but the fibers have different arrangements .
When smooth muscles in the stomach contract , they squeeze food inside the stomach .
This helps break the food into smaller pieces .
Skeletal muscle is attached to the bones of the skeleton .
It is striated like cardiac muscle because its muscle fibers are arranged in bundles .
This means that they are under conscious control .
Cardiac muscle is found only in the walls of the heart .
It is striated , or striped , because its muscle fibers are arranged in bundles .
This means that they are not under conscious control .
Smooth muscle is found in the walls of other internal organs such as the stomach .
It isnt striated because its muscle fibers are arranged in sheets rather than bundles .
You can see the bundles of muscle fibers that make up a skeletal muscle in Figure 16.19 .
You can also see in the figure how the muscle is attached to a bone by a tendon .
Tendons are tough connective tissues that anchor skeletal muscles to bones throughout the body .
Many skeletal muscles are attached to the ends of bones where they meet at a joint .
The muscles span the joint and connect the bones .
When the muscles contract , they pull on the bones , causing them to move .
Therefore , to move bones back and forth at a joint , skeletal muscles must work in pairs .
You can see how this pair of muscles works in Figure 16.20 .
When the bicep muscle contracts , it bends the arm at the elbow .
When the triceps muscle contracts , it straightens the arm .
They will also become weaker and more prone to injury .
Exercising muscles increases their size , and bigger muscles have greater strength .
Lifting weights is one way to pit skeletal muscles against a resisting force .
Snowshoeing is a fun way to get aerobic exercise .
To increase the size and strength of skeletal muscles , you need to make these muscles contract against a resisting force .
To exercise cardiac muscle and increase muscle endurance , you need to do aerobic exercise .
Aerobic exercise increases the size and strength of muscles in the heart and helps all your muscles develop greater endurance .
Aerobic exercise is any exercise such as running , biking , or swimming that causes an increase in your heart rate .
Stretching also helps prevent muscle injuries .
Stretching improves the range of motion of muscles and tendons at joints .
One way to warm up is to jog slowly for a few minutes .
Your body needs food for three purposes : 1 .
Food gives the body energy .
The energy in food is measured in a unit called the Calorie .
Food provides building materials for the body .
The body needs building materials for growth and repair .
Food contains substances that help control body processes .
Body processes must be kept in balance for good health .
Any substance in food that the body needs is called a nutrient .
Carbohydrates , proteins , and lipids can be used for energy .
Proteins also provide building materials .
Proteins , minerals , and vitamins help control body processes .
Water is needed by all cells just to stay alive .
The six types of nutrients can be divided into two major categories based on how much of them the body needs .
Macronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively large amounts .
Carbohydrates include sugars , starches , and fiber .
Sugars and starches are used by the body for energy .
Starches are broken down by your digestive system to glucose , which is used for energy .
Fiber is a complex carbohydrate that consists mainly of cellulose and comes only from plants .
High-fiber foods include whole grains and legumes such as beans .
Fiber cant be broken down by the digestive system , but it plays important roles in the body .
It also helps keep food waste moist so it can pass easily out of the body .
One gram of sugar or starch provides 4 Calories of energy .
Fiber doesnt provide energy , but it is needed for other uses .
Sugars in foods such as these are broken down by your digestive system to glucose , the simplest of all sugars .
Glucose is taken up by cells for energy .
Proteins are nutrients made up of smaller molecules called amino acids .
The digestive system breaks down proteins in food to amino acids , which are used for protein synthesis .
Proteins synthesized from the amino acids in food serve many vital functions .
If you eat more protein than you need for these functions , the extra protein is used for energy .
One gram of protein provides 4 Calories of energy , the same as carbohydrates .
Trans fat is rare in nature but is manufactured and added to foods to preserve freshness .
Trans fat may be found in such foods as cookies , doughnuts , crackers , fried foods , ground beef , and margarine .
One gram of lipids provides the body with 9 Calories of energy , more than twice as much as carbohydrates or proteins .
Lipids also make up cell membranes , protect nerves , control blood pressure , and help blood clot .
Good food sources of lipids are shown in Figure 17.4 .
A certain amount of stored fat is needed to cushion and protect internal organs and insulate the body .
However , too much stored fat can lead to obesity and cause significant health problems .
A type of lipid called trans fat is found in many processed foods .
Most people can survive only a few days without consuming water to replace their water losses .
The boy in Figure 17.5 is taking a water break while playing outside on a hot day .
If he doesnt take in enough water to replace the water lost in sweat , he may become dehydrated .
Symptoms of dehydration include dry mouth , headache , and dizziness .
Micronutrients are nutrients the body needs in relatively small amounts .
These nutrients dont provide the body with energy , but they are still essential for good health .
Minerals are chemical elements that dont come from living things or include the element carbon .
Many minerals are needed in the diet for normal functioning of the body .
Many people get too much sodium .
Sodium is added to most packaged foods .
People often add more sodium to their food by using table salt .
Too much sodium has been linked to high blood pressure in some people .
Several minerals that are needed in relatively large amounts are listed in Table 17.1 .
Your body cant produce any of the minerals it needs , so you must get them from the food you eat .
The table shows good food sources of the minerals .
Mineral Calcium Chloride Magnesium Phosphorus Potassium Sodium Function strong bones and teeth salt-water balance strong bones strong bones and teeth muscle and nerve functions muscle and nerve functions Good Food Sources milk , green leafy vegetables table salt , most packaged foods whole grains , nuts poultry , whole grains meat , bananas table salt , most packaged foods Not getting enough minerals can cause health problems .
For example , not getting enough calcium may cause osteoporosis .
This is a disease in which the bones become porous so they break easily .
Getting too much of some minerals can also cause health problems .
The vitamins to watch out for are A , D , E , and K . These vitamins are stored by the body , so they can build up to high levels .
The digestive system is the body system that breaks down food and absorbs nutrients .
It also eliminates solid food wastes that remain after food is digested .
The major organs of the digestive system are shown in Figure 17.10 .
For an entertaining overview of the digestive system and how it works , watch this video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The organs in Figure 17.10 make up the gastrointestinal -LRB- GI -RRB- tract .
This is essentially a long tube that connects the mouth to the anus .
Food enters the mouth and then passes through the rest of the GI tract .
Food waste leaves the body through the anus .
Organs of the GI tract are covered by muscles that contract to keep food moving along .
A series of involuntary muscle contractions moves rapidly along the tract , like a wave travelling through a spring toy .
As food is pushed through the GI tract by peristalsis , it undergoes digestion .
Mechanical digestion occurs when large chunks of food are broken down into smaller pieces .
This is a physical process that happens mainly in the mouth and stomach .
Chemical digestion occurs when large food molecules are broken down into smaller nutrient molecules .
This is a chemical process that begins in the mouth and stomach but occurs mainly in the small intestine .
After food is broken down into nutrient molecules , the molecules are absorbed by the blood .
Absorption is the process in which nutrients or other molecules are taken up by the blood .
Once absorbed by the blood , nutrients can travel in the bloodstream to cells throughout the body .
Some substances in food cant be broken down into nutrients .
This process is called elimination .
Chemical digestion could not take place without the help of digestive enzymes and other substances secreted into the GI tract .
An enzyme is a protein that speeds up a biochemical reaction .
Some liver bile is secreted directly into the small intestine .
Some liver bile goes to the gall bladder .
This sac-like organ stores and concentrates the liver bile before releasing it into the small intestine .
Table 17.3 lists a few digestive enzymes , the organs that produce them , and their functions in digestion .
Enzyme Amylase Pepsin Organ that Produces It mouth stomach Substance It Helps Digest starch protein Enzyme Lipase Ribonuclease Organ that Produces It pancreas pancreas Substance It Helps Digest fat RNA Most digestive enzymes are secreted into the GI tract by organs of the GI tract or from a nearby gland named the pancreas .
The figure also shows the locations of the liver and gall bladder .
These organs produce or store other digestive secretions .
The liver secretes bile acids .
Bile acids help digest fat .
Does the sight or smell of your favorite food make your mouth water ?
The mouth is the first digestive organ that food enters .
The sight , smell , or taste of food stimulates the release of saliva and digestive enzymes by salivary glands inside the mouth .
From the pharynx , the food passes into the esophagus .
Saliva wets the food , which makes it easier to break up and swallow .
The enzyme amylase in saliva begins the chemical digestion of starches to sugars .
Your teeth help to mechanically digest food .
Look at the different types of human teeth in Figure 17.13 .
Sharp teeth in the front of the mouth cut or tear food when you bite into it .
Broad teeth in the back of the mouth grind food when you chew .
Your tongue helps mix the food with saliva and enzymes and also helps you swallow .
When you swallow , a lump of chewed food passes from the mouth into a tube in your throat called the pharynx .
The esophagus is a long , narrow tube that carries food from the pharynx to the stomach .
Food moves through the esophagus because of peristalsis .
At the lower end of the esophagus , a circular muscle , called a sphincter , controls the opening to the stomach .
The sphincter relaxes to let food pass into the stomach .
Then the sphincter contracts to prevent food from passing back into the esophagus .
It has thick muscular walls that contract and relax to squeeze and mix food .
It also helps mix the food with enzymes and other secretions in the stomach .
For example , the stomach secretes the enzyme pepsin , which helps digest proteins .
Water , salt , and simple sugars can be absorbed into the blood from the lining of the stomach .
However , most substances must undergo further digestion in the small intestine before they can be absorbed .
The stomach stores the partly digested food until the small intestine is empty .
Then a sphincter between the stomach and small intestine relaxes , allowing food to enter the small intestine .
The small intestine is a narrow tube that starts at the stomach and ends at the large intestine .
The inside surface of the jejunum is covered with tiny projections called villi -LRB- villus , singular -RRB- .
The villi make the inner surface of the small intestine 1000 times greater than it would be without them .
You can read in Figure 17.14 how villi are involved in absorption .
From the ileum , any remaining food waste passes into the large intestine .
Most chemical digestion and almost all nutrient absorption take place in the small intestine .
The small intestine is made up of three parts : 1 .
Many enzymes and other substances involved in digestion are secreted into the duodenum 2 .
This is where most nutrients are absorbed into the blood .
The large intestine is a wide tube that connects the small intestine with the anus .
Food waste enters the large intestine from the small intestine in a liquid state .
As the waste moves through the large intestine , excess water is absorbed from it .
The remaining solid waste is called feces .
After a certain amount of feces have collected , a sphincter relaxes to let the feces pass out of the body through the anus .
Trillions of bacteria normally live in the large intestine .
For example , intestinal bacteria : produce vitamins B12 and K. control the growth of harmful bacteria .
break down toxins in the large intestine .
This type of illness occurs when harmful bacteria enter your digestive system in food and make you sick .
Following these healthy practices may decrease your risk of foodborne illness : Wash your hands after handling raw foods such as meats , poultry , fish , or eggs .
These foods often contain bacteria that your hands could transfer to your mouth .
Cook meats , poultry , fish , or eggs thoroughly before eating them .
The heat of cooking kills any bacteria the foods may contain so they cant make you sick .
Keep hot foods hot and cold foods cold .
This is especially important when food is packed for lunch or a picnic -LRB- see Figure 17.15 -RRB- .
Maintaining the proper temperature slows the growth of bacteria in the food .
Food allergies occur when the immune system reacts to harmless substances in food as though they were harmful germs .
Some of the foods most likely to cause allergies include milk , shellfish , nuts , grains , and eggs .
In some people , eating even tiny amounts of certain foods causes them to have serious symptoms , such as difficulty breathing .
They need immediate medical attention .
The best way to prevent food allergy symptoms is to avoid eating the offending food .
This may require careful reading of food labels .
The organs that make up the cardiovascular system are the heart and a network of blood vessels that run throughout the body .
Figure 18.1 shows the heart and major vessels through which blood flows in the system .
The heart is basically a pump that keeps blood moving through the blood vessels .
The main function of the cardiovascular system is transporting substances around the body .
Figure 18.1 shows some of the substances that are transported in the blood .
Transport of all these materials is necessary to maintain homeostasis of the body and life itself .
The cardiovascular system also helps regulate body temperature by controlling where blood moves around the body .
Blood is warm , so when more blood flows to the surface of the body , it warms the surface .
This allows the body to lose excess heat from the surface .
When less blood flows to the surface , it cools the surface .
This allows the body to conserve heat and stay warm .
You can see the role of blood vessels in the regulation of body temperature in this video : .
The heart and blood vessels form a closed system through which blood keeps circulating .
However , blood actually circulates in two different loops within this closed system .
The two loops are called pulmonary circulation and systemic circulation .
In both loops , blood passes through the heart .
As blood circulates through the body , it travels first through one loop and then the other loop , over and over again .
Oxygen-poor blood flows from the heart to the lungs .
In the lungs , the blood absorbs oxygen and releases carbon dioxide .
Oxygen-rich blood flows from the heart to cells throughout the body .
As it passes cells , the blood releases oxygen and absorbs carbon dioxide .
This produces the familiar lub-dub sound of each heartbeat .
For a good video introduction to the heart and how it works , watch this entertaining Bill Nye video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The top two chambers of the heart are called the left and right atria -LRB- atrium , singular -RRB- .
The atria of the heart receive blood from the body or lungs and pump it into the bottom chambers of the heart .
The bottom two chambers of the heart are called the left and right ventricles .
The ventricles receive blood from the atria and pump it out of the heart , either to the lungs or to the rest of the body .
Flaps of tissue called valves separate the hearts chambers .
Valves keep blood flowing in just one direction through the heart .
For example , a valve at the bottom of the right atrium opens to let blood flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle .
Blood flows through the heart in two paths .
The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs .
You can also learn about how blood flows through the heart with this rap : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The right atrium receives oxygen - poor blood from the body .
To move blood through the heart , cardiac muscles must contract in a certain sequence .
First the atria must contract , followed quickly by the ventricles contracting .
This series of contractions keeps blood moving continuously through the heart .
They are controlled by a cluster of special cells within the heart , commonly called the pacemaker .
These cells send electrical signals to cardiac muscles so they contract in the correct sequence and with just the right timing .
Blood vessels are long , tube-like organs that consist mainly of muscle , connective , and epithelial tissues .
They branch to form a complex network of vessels that run throughout the body .
This network transports blood to all the bodys cells .
To keep the blood moving , many veins have valves that prevent the backflow of blood .
Veins generally carry oxygen-poor blood .
The smallest veins are called venules .
The largest vein is the inferior vena cava , which carries blood from the lower body directly to the heart .
You can watch a good video introduction to the three types at this link : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : Arteries are muscular blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart .
They have thick walls that can withstand the pressure of blood pumped by the heart .
Arteries generally carry oxygen-rich blood .
The largest artery is the aorta , which receives blood directly from the heart .
It branches to form smaller and smaller arteries throughout the body .
The smallest arteries are called arterioles .
Veins are blood vessels that carry blood toward the heart .
Blood vessels help regulate body processes by either dilating -LRB- widening -RRB- or constricting -LRB- narrowing -RRB- .
This changes the amount of blood flowing to particular organs .
For example , dilation of blood vessels in the skin allows more blood to flow to the surface of the body .
This helps the body lose excess heat .
Constriction of these blood vessels has the opposite effect and helps the body conserve heat .
A healthy lifestyle can reduce the risk of such diseases developing .
Diseases of the heart and blood vessels are called cardiovascular diseases .
Atherosclerosis is a condition in which a material called plaque builds up inside arteries .
Plaque consists of cell debris , cholesterol , and other substances .
As plaque builds up in an artery , the artery narrows , as shown in Figure If plaque blocks coronary arteries that supply blood to the heart , coronary heart disease results .
Poor blood flow to the heart may cause chest pain or a heart attack .
A heart attack occurs when the blood supply to part of the heart muscle is completely blocked so that cardiac muscle cells die .
Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death in U.S adults .
Many factors influence your risk of developing cardiovascular diseases .
Older age , male gender , and a family history of cardiovascular disease all increase the risk and cant be controlled .
get regular checkups to detect and manage problems such as high blood pressure and high blood cholesterol .
It circulates throughout the body via blood vessels due to the pumping action of the heart .
You couldnt survive without the approximately 4.5 to 5 liters of blood that are constantly being pumped through your blood vessels .
Blood consists of both liquid and cells .
The liquid part of blood is called plasma .
Hemoglobin is a protein that contains iron .
The iron in hemoglobin gives red blood cells their red color .
It also explains how hemoglobin carries oxygen .
The iron in hemoglobin binds with oxygen molecules so they can be carried by red blood cells .
Their role is to defend the body in various ways .
For example , white blood cells called phagocytes engulf and destroy microorganisms and debris in the blood .
Plasma is a watery , golden-yellow fluid that contains many dissolved substances .
Platelets are small , sticky cell fragments that help blood clot .
A blood clot is a solid mass of cell fragments and other substances that plugs a leak in a damaged blood vessel .
Platelets stick to tears in blood vessels and to each other , helping to form a clot at the site of injury .
Platelets also release chemicals that are needed for clotting to occur .
Substances dissolved in plasma include glucose , proteins , and gases .
Plasma also contains blood cells .
Blood in arteries carries oxygen and nutrients to all the bodys cells .
Blood in veins carries carbon dioxide and other wastes away from cells to be excreted .
Blood also transports the chemical messengers called hormones to cells throughout the body where they are needed to regulate body functions .
For example , blood : defends the body against infections .
Red blood cells carry proteins called antigens on their surface .
People may vary in the exact antigens their red blood cells carry .
The clumped cells block blood vessels and cause other life-threatening problems .
There are many sets of antigens that determine different blood types .
Both are described below .
The specific proteins are controlled by the genes they inherit from their parents .
The particular antigens you inherit determine your blood type .
A patient cant safely receive a transfusion of blood containing antigens not found in the patients own blood .
With foreign antigens , the transfused blood will be rejected by the persons immune system .
This causes a reaction in the patients bloodstream , called agglutination .
The transfused red blood cells clump together , as shown in Figure 18.9 .
ABO blood type is determined by two common antigens , often called antigen A and antigen B.
If your red blood cells carry only antigen A , you have blood type A.
If your red blood cells carry only antigen B , you have blood type B.
If your red blood cells carry neither antigen A nor antigen B , you have blood type O.
Another red blood cell antigen determines a persons Rhesus blood type .
This blood type depends on a single common antigen , typically referred to as the Rhesus -LRB- Rh -RRB- antigen .
If your red blood cells carry the Rhesus antigen , you have Rhesus-positive blood , or blood type Rh + .
If your red blood cells lack the Rhesus antigen , you have Rhesus-negative blood , or blood type Rh - .
Some diseases affect mainly the blood or its components .
Anemia is a disease that occurs when there is not enough hemoglobin -LRB- or iron -RRB- in the blood so it cant carry adequate oxygen to the cells .
Leukemia is a type of cancer in which bone marrow produces abnormal white blood cells .
The abnormal cells cant do their job of fighting infections .
Like most cancers , leukemia is thought to be caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors .
Hemophilia is a genetic disorder in which blood fails to clot properly because a normal clotting factor in the blood is lacking .
In people with hemophilia , even a minor injury can cause a life-threatening loss of blood .
Most cases of hemophilia are caused by a recessive gene on the X chromosome .
The disorder is expressed much more commonly in males because they have just one X chromosome .
Sickle-cell disease occurs in people who inherit two copies of the recessive mutant gene for hemoglobin .
The abnormal hemoglobin that results causes red blood cells to take on a characteristic sickle shape under certain conditions .
The sickle-shaped cells get stuck in tiny capillaries and block blood flow .
This causes serious , painful symptoms .
Watch this video animation to learn more about the genetic basis of sickle-cell disease :
The bodys exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide with the air is called respiration .
Respiration actually consists of two stages .
It also removes the carbon dioxide produced by cellular respiration .
In one stage , air is taken into the body and carbon dioxide is released to the outside air .
In the other stage , oxygen is delivered to all the cells of the body and carbon dioxide is carried away from the cells .
Another kind of respiration takes place within body cells .
This kind of respiration is called cellular respiration .
Its the process in which cells obtain energy by burning glucose .
Cellular respiration uses oxygen and produces carbon dioxide .
Respiration by the respiratory system supplies the oxygen needed for cellular respiration .
Use the figure to trace how air moves through the respiratory system when you read about it below .
Take in a big breath of air through your nose .
As you breathe in , you may feel the air pass down through your throat and notice your chest expand .
Breathing in and out may seem like simple actions , but they are just part of the complex process of respiration .
Respiration actually occurs in four steps : 1 .
Breathing is the process of moving air into and out of the lungs .
The process depends on a muscle called the diaphragm .
When you inhale , air enters the respiratory system through your nose and ends up in your lungs , where gas exchange with the blood takes place .
The air is also warmed and moistened so it wont harm delicate tissues of the lungs .
Next , air passes through the pharynx , a passageway that is shared with the digestive system .
From the pharynx , the air passes next through the larynx , or voice box .
This is a long tube that leads down to the lungs in the chest .
In the chest , the trachea divides as it enters the lungs to form the right and left bronchi -LRB- bronchus , singular -RRB- .
These passages are covered with mucus and tiny hairs called cilia .
The mucus traps any remaining particles in the air .
The cilia move and sweep the particles and mucus toward the throat so they can be expelled from the body .
Air passes from the bronchi into smaller passages called bronchioles .
Inhaling , or breathing in , occurs when the diaphragm contracts .
This increases the size of the chest , which decreases air pressure inside the lungs .
The difference in air pressure between the lungs and outside air causes air to rush into the lungs .
Exhaling , or breathing out , occurs when the diaphragm relaxes .
This decreases the size of the chest , which increases air pressure inside the lungs .
The difference in air pressure between the lungs and outside air causes air to rush out of the lungs .
Each alveolus is surrounded by a network of capillaries .
The difference in oxygen concentration causes oxygen to diffuse from the air into the blood .
You can see how this occurs in Figure 19.3 .
Unlike oxygen , carbon dioxide is more concentrated in the blood in the capillaries surrounding the alveoli than it is in the air inside the alveoli .
Therefore , carbon dioxide diffuses in the opposite direction .
After the blood in the capillaries in the lungs picks up oxygen , it leaves the lungs and travels to the heart .
The heart pumps the oxygen-rich blood into arteries , which carry it throughout the body .
The blood passes eventually into capillaries that supply body cells .
Therefore , oxygen diffuses from the blood into the cells .
Carbon dioxide , which cells produce in cellular respiration , is more concentrated in the cells .
The carbon dioxide travels in capillaries to veins and then to the heart .
The heart pumps the blood to the lungs , where the carbon dioxide diffuses into the alveoli .
This brings the process of respiration full circle .
For example , you may have had a stuffy nose that made it hard to breathe .
Common diseases of the respiratory system include asthma , pneumonia , and emphysema .
The damage to the alveoli is usually caused by smoking and is permanent .
You can see some of the changes in the lungs that occur in each of these diseases in Figure 19.4 .
Asthma is a disease in which bronchioles in the lungs periodically swell and fill with mucus .
An asthma attack may be triggered by allergies , strenuous exercise , stress , or another respiratory illness such as a cold .
Pneumonia is a disease in which some of the alveoli of the lungs fill with fluid so they can no longer exchange gas .
Symptoms of pneumonia typically include coughing , chest pain , difficulty breathing , and fatigue .
Pneumonia may be caused by an infection or an injury to the lungs .
Emphysema is a disease in which the walls of the alveoli break down so less gas can be exchanged by the lungs .
The main way to keep your respiratory system healthy is to avoid smoking or breathing in the smoke of others .
Smoking causes , or makes you more susceptible to , many respiratory diseases , including asthma , bronchitis , em - physema , and lung cancer .
Other steps you can take to keep your respiratory system healthy are listed below .
These healthy lifestyle choices will help keep your immune system healthy so it can fight off respiratory infections and other diseases .
This will reduce your risk of picking up viruses or bacteria that could make you sick with colds or other respiratory infections .
Avoid contact with other people when they are sick and stay home when you are sick .
These steps will help reduce the spread of infectious diseases .
Excretion is any process in which excess water or wastes are removed from the body .
Besides the kidneys , other organs of excretion include the large intestine , liver , skin and lungs .
The large intestine eliminates food wastes that remain after digestion takes place .
The liver removes excess amino acids and toxins from the blood .
The lungs exhale carbon dioxide and also excess water as water vapor .
The urinary system is shown in Figure 19.6 .
The main function of the urinary system is to filter waste products and excess water from the blood and excrete them from the body as urine .
Tiny structures in the kidneys , called nephrons , perform this function .
Each kidney contains more than a million nephrons .
Blood with wastes enters each kidney through an artery , which branches into many capillaries .
After passing through capillaries and being filtered , the clean blood leaves the kidney through a vein .
The part of each nephron called the glomerulus is where blood in the capillaries is filtered .
Excess water and wastes are filtered out of the blood .
The tubule of the nephron collects these substances .
Some of the water is reabsorbed .
From the kidneys , urine enters the ureters .
These are two muscular tubes that carry urine to the urinary bladder .
Contractions of the muscles of the ureters move the urine along by peristalsis .
When the bladder is about half full , a sphincter relaxes to let urine flow out of the bladder and into the urethra .
The urethra is a muscular tube that carries urine out of the body through another sphincter .
The process of urine leaving the body is called urination .
The kidneys help the body maintain homeostasis in several ways .
The kidneys also secrete hormones that help maintain homeostasis .
For example , they produce a hormone that stimulates bone marrow to produce red blood cells when more are needed .
They also secrete a hormone that regulates blood pressure and keeps it in a normal range .
A single kidney can do all the work of filtering the blood and maintaining homeostasis .
Untreated diabetes may damage capillaries in the kidneys so the nephrons can no longer filter blood .
This is called kidney failure .
The only cure for kidney failure is to receive a healthy transplanted kidney from a donor .
Until that happens , a patient with kidney failure can be kept alive by artificially filtering the blood through a machine .
However , at least one kidney must function properly to maintain life .
Diseases that threaten the health and functioning of the kidneys include kidney stones , infections , and diabetes .
URL : Kidney stones are mineral crystals that form in urine inside a kidney , as shown in Figure 19.8 .
If a kidney stone blocks a ureter , it must be removed so urine can leave the kidney and be excreted .
All known matter can be divided into a little more than 100 different substances called elements .
An element is pure substance that can not be broken down into other substances .
Each element has a particular set of properties that , taken together , distinguish it from all other elements .
Element Oxygen Carbon Hydrogen Nitrogen Calcium Phosphorus Potassium Sulfur Percent of Body Mass 65 18 10 3 1.5 1.0 0.35 0.25 In your body , most elements are combined with other elements to form chemical compounds .
For example , much of the oxygen and hydrogen in your body are combined in the chemical compound water , or H2O .
The nucleus is surrounded by negatively charged particles called electrons .
A molecule consists of two or more atoms .
A biochemical compound is a carbon-based compound that is found in living organisms .
Carbon is an element that has a tremendous ability to form large compounds .
Each atom of carbon can form four chemical bonds with other atoms .
Bonds hold the atoms together in chemical compounds .
A carbon atom can form bonds with other carbon atoms or with atoms of other elements .
Even so , all biochemical compounds can be grouped into just four main classes : carbohydrates , proteins , lipids , and nucleic acids .
The classes are summarized in Table 2.1 .
Class Elements Examples Functions Class Carbohydrates Elements carbon hydrogen oxygen Examples sugars starch glycogen cellulose Proteins carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen sulfur carbon hydrogen oxygen carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen phosphorus enzymes hormones Lipids Nucleic acids fats oils phospholipids DNA RNA Functions provide energy to cells stores energy in plants stores energy in animals makes up the cell walls of plants speed up biochemical re - actions regulate life processes store energy in animals store energy in plants make up cell membranes stores genetic information in cells helps cells make proteins
You can see from Table 2.1 that all biochemical compounds contain hydrogen and oxygen as well as carbon .
Polymers are large molecules that consist of many smaller , repeating molecules , called monomers .
The prefix macro - means large , and many biochemical molecules are very large indeed .
The largest known biochemical molecule contains more than 34,000 monomers !
Carbohydrates are biochemical compounds that include sugar , starch , glycogen , and cellulose .
Consumers can get starches by eating plants .
Common sources of starches in the human diet are pictured in the Figure 2.8 .
Our digestive system breaks down starches to sugar , which our cells use for energy .
Like other animals , we store any extra glucose as the complex carbohydrate called glycogen .
Cellulose is another complex carbohydrate found in plants that is a polymer of glucose .
Cellulose molecules bundle together to form long , tough fibers .
This means that a molecule of glucose contains 6 atoms of carbon , 12 atoms of hydrogen , and 6 atoms of oxygen .
Plants and some other organisms make glucose in the process of photosynthesis .
Living things that can not make glucose can obtain it by consuming plants or organisms that consume plants .
Starches contain hundreds of glucose monomers .
Plants make starches to store extra glucose .
Proteins are biochemical compounds that consist of one or more chains of small molecules called amino acids .
The sequence of amino acids in chains and the number of chains in a protein determine the proteins shape .
You can learn more about the shapes of proteins at this link : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : The shape of a protein determines its function .
For example , proteins : make up muscle tissues .
speed up chemical reactions in cells .
Lipids are biochemical compounds that living things use to store energy and make cell membranes .
The Figure 2.10 shows an example of each type of fatty acid .
Fats are solid lipids that animals use to store energy .
Examples of fats include butter and the fat in meat .
Oils are liquid lipids that plants use to store energy .
Examples of oils include olive oil and corn oil .
Lipids are made of long chains consisting almost solely of carbon and hydrogen .
These long chains are called fatty acids .
Nucleic acids are biochemical compounds that include RNA -LRB- ribonucleic acid -RRB- and DNA -LRB- deoxyribonucleic acid -RRB- .
Nucleic acids consist of chains of small molecules called nucleotides .
RNA consists of just one chain of nucleotides .
DNA consists of two chains .
The bonded bases are called base pairs .
Bonds form only between adenine and thymine , and between guanine and cytosine .
Sugars and phosphate groups form the backbone of each chain of DNA .
This is the code that instructs cells how to make proteins .
The instructions are encoded in the sequence of nitrogen bases in DNAs nucleotide chains .
RNA copies and interprets the genetic code in DNA .
RNA is also involved in the synthesis of proteins based on the code .
A nucleotide is shown in Figure 2.11 .
Each nucleotide consists of : 1 . a phosphate group , which contains phosphorus and oxygen .
The sum of all of an organisms biochemical reactions is called metabolism .
Biochemical reactions of metabolism can be divided into two general categories : catabolic reactions and anabolic reactions .
You can watch an animation showing how the two categories of reactions are related at this link : Anabolic reactions involve forming bonds .
Smaller molecules combine to form larger ones .
These reactions require energy .
For example , it takes energy to build starches from sugars .
Catabolic reactions involve breaking bonds .
Larger molecules break down to form smaller ones .
These reactions release energy .
For example , energy is released when starches break down to sugars .
Each of the trillions of cells in your body is continuously performing thousands of anabolic and catabolic reactions .
Thats an amazing number of biochemical reactionsfar more than the number of chemical reactions that might take place in a science lab or chemical plant .
So many biochemical reactions can take place simultaneously in our cells because biochemical reactions occur very quickly .
Enzymes are proteins that increase the rate of biochemical reactions .
Enzymes arent changed or used up in the reactions , so they can be used to speed up the same reaction over and over again .
A reaction that would take years to occur without its enzyme might occur in a split second with the enzyme .
Some of the most important biochemical reactions are the reactions involved in photosynthesis and cellular respira - tion .
Photosynthesis is the process in which producers capture light energy from the sun and use it to make glucose .
Cellular respiration is the process in which energy is released from glucose and stored in smaller amounts in other molecules that cells can use for energy .
This involves catabolic reactions .
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration together provide energy to almost all living cells .
Some muscles contracted while other relaxed .
As a result , Hakeem gained his balance again .
How did his nervous system accomplish all of this in just a split second ?
You need to know how the nervous system transmits messages to answer that question .
It senses the surrounding environment with sense organs that include the eyes and ears .
It senses the bodys own internal environment , including its temperature .
It controls internal body systems to make sure the body maintains homeostasis .
It prepares the body to fight or flee in the case of an emergency .
When Hakeem started to fall off the railing , his nervous system sensed that he was losing his balance .
The nervous system is made up of nerves .
A nerve cell that carries messages is called a neuron .
The messages carried by neurons are called nerve impulses .
A nerve impulse can travel very quickly because it is an electrical signal .
Think about flipping on a light switch when you enter a room .
When you flip the switch , electricity flows to the light through wires inside the walls .
The electricity may have to travel many meters to reach the light .
Nonetheless , the light still comes on as soon as you flip the switch .
Nerve impulses travel just as quickly through the network of nerves inside the body .
The axon passes on the nerve impulses to other cells .
It branches at the end into multiple nerve endings so it can transmit impulses to many other cells .
It has a special shape that lets it pass electrical signals to and from other cells .
The cell body contains the nucleus and other organelles .
Dendrites receive nerve impulses from other cells .
All three types must work together to receive and respond to information .
Sensory neurons transmit nerve impulses from sense organs and internal organs to the brain via the spinal cord .
Motor neurons transmit nerve impulses from the brain via the spinal cord to internal organs , glands , and muscles .
Interneurons carry nerve impulses back and forth between sensory and motor neurons .
The nerve endings of an axon dont actually touch the dendrites of other neurons .
The messages must cross a tiny gap between the two neurons , called the synapse .
Chemicals called neurotransmitters carry the message across this gap .
When a nerve impulse arrives at the end of an axon , neurotransmitters are released .
The neurotransmitters bind to the membrane of the dendrite , triggering a nerve impulse in the next neuron .
You can see how this works in Figure 20.3 and in this animation : The transmission of nerve impulses between neurons is like the passing of a baton between runners in a relay race .
After the first runner races , she passes the baton to the second runner .
Instead of a baton , a neuron passes neurotransmitters to the next neuron .
The nervous system has two main parts , called the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system .
The peripheral nervous system is described later in this lesson .
The central nervous system is shown in Figure 20.4 .
By adulthood , the brain weighs about 3 pounds and consists of billions of neurons .
In fact , the adult brain uses almost a quarter of the total energy used by the body !
The brain consists of three major parts , called the cerebrum , cerebellum , and brain stem .
You can see these three parts of the brain in Figure 20.5 .
The brain stem -LRB- also called the medulla -RRB- is the smallest part of the brain .
Hakeems cerebellum kicked in when he started to lose his balance on the railing in the opening photo .
The cerebrum is divided down the middle from the front to the back of the head .
The two halves of the cerebrum are called the right and left hemispheres .
They are connected to each other by a thick bundle of axons deep within the brain .
These axons allow the two hemispheres to communicate with each other .
Did you know that the right hemisphere of the cerebrum controls the left side of the body , and vice versa ?
This can happen because of the connections between the two hemispheres .
Each hemisphere is further divided into four parts , called lobes , as you can see in Figure 20.6 .
One function of each lobe is listed in the figure .
The main job of the spinal cord is to carry nerve impulses back and forth between the body and brain .
Messages about the body , both inside and out , pass through the spinal cord to the brain .
Messages from the brain pass in the other direction through the spinal cord to tell the body what to do .
They include nerves that run through virtually every part of the body , both inside and out , except for the brain and spinal cord .
The divisions carry messages in opposite directions .
The sensory division of the peripheral nervous system carries messages from sense organs and internal organs to the central nervous system .
Once the messages reach the brain , the brain interprets the information .
The brain sends commands to these tissues , telling them how to respond .
As you can see in Figure 20.7 , the motor division is divided into additional parts .
The autonomic part of the motor division controls involuntary responses .
These messages control the body both during emergencies -LRB- sympathetic division -RRB- and during none - mergencies -LRB- parasympathetic division -RRB- .
The somatic part of the motor division controls voluntary responses .
Nervous system problems include diseases and injuries .
Bacteria and viruses can infect the brain or spinal cord .
An infection of the brain is called encephalitis .
An infection of the membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord is called meningitis .
A vaccine is available to prevent meningitis caused by viruses -LRB- see Figure 20.8 -RRB- .
Both encephalitis and meningitis typically cause a severe headache and a fever .
Meningitis also causes a stiff neck .
A seizure is a period of lost consciousness that may include violent muscle contractions .
Epilepsy may result from an infection , injury , or tumor .
In many cases , however , the cause cant be identified .
There is no known cure for epilepsy , but the seizures often can be prevented with medicine .
Sometimes children with epilepsy outgrow it by adulthood .
A stroke occurs when a blood clot blocks blood flow to part of the brain .
Brain cells die quickly when their oxygen supply is cut off .
Therefore , a stroke may cause permanent loss of normal mental functions .
Many stroke patients suffer some degree of paralysis , or loss of the ability to feel or move certain parts of the body .
If medical treatment is given very soon after a stroke occurs , some of the damage may be reversed .
Strokes occur mainly in older adults .
Alzheimers disease is another disease that occurs mainly in older adults .
In Alzheimers disease , a person gradually loses most normal mental functions .
The patient typically suffers from increasing memory loss , confusion , and mood swings .
There is no known cure for this devastating disease , but medicines may be able to slow its progression .
The brain and spinal cord are protected within bones of the skeletal system , but injuries to these organs still occur .
However , repeated concussions can lead to permanent changes in the brain .
More serious brain injuries also often cause permanent brain damage .
Spinal cord injuries may cause paralysis .
However , many people remain paralyzed for life .
This happens when the spinal cord can no longer transmit nerve impulses between the body and brain .
Brain and spinal cord injuries most commonly occur because of car crashes or athletic activities .
Fortunately , many injuries can be prevented by wearing seat belts and safety helmets -LRB- see Figure 20.9 -RRB- .
Avoiding unnecessary risks , such as doing stunts on a bike or diving into shallow water , can also reduce the chances of brain and spinal cord injuries .
Most concussions heal on their own in a few days or weeks .
A drug is any chemical substance that affects the body or brain .
Although these drugs are helpful when used properly , they can be misused like any other drug .
Drugs that arent medicines include both legal and illegal drugs .
Many drugs affect the brain and influence how a person feels , thinks , or acts .
Such drugs are called psychoactive drugs .
Some psychoactive drugs , such as caffeine , stimulate the central nervous system .
They may make the user feel more alert .
Some psychoactive drugs , such as alcohol , depress the central nervous system .
They may make the user feel more relaxed .
Continued use of a psychoactive drug may lead to drug addiction .
This occurs when a drug user is unable to stop using the drug .
Over time , a drug user may need more of the drug to get the desired effect .
The ability to see is called vision .
The eyes sense light and form images .
The brain interprets the images formed by the eyes and tells us what we are seeing .
For a fascinating account of how the brain helps us see , watch this short video : .
Did you ever use 3-D glasses to watch a movie , like the teens in Figure 20.11 ?
If you did , then you know that the glasses make images on the flat screen seem more realistic by giving them depth .
The exact wavelength of visible light determines its color .
The images seem to jump right out of the screen toward you .
Unlike many other animals , human beings and other primates normally see the world around them in three dimen - sions .
Thats because we have two eyes that face the same direction but are a few inches apart .
Both eyes focus on the same object at the same time but from slightly different angles .
The brain uses the different images from the two eyes to determine the distance to the object .
Human beings and other primates also have the ability to see in color .
We have special cells inside our eyes that can distinguish different wavelengths of visible light .
The function of the eye is to focus light and form images .
The pupil , which looks black , is surrounded by the colored part of the eye , called the iris .
Along with the cornea , the lens focuses the light on the back of the eye .
The back of the eye is covered by a thin layer called the retina .
This is where the image of the object normally forms .
The retina consists of special light-sensing cells called rods and cones .
However , we see most objects because they reflect light from another source such as the sun .
Rods sense dim light .
Cones sense different colors of light .
Nerve impulses from rods and cones travel to the optic nerve .
We form images of the objects when some of the reflected light enters our eyes .
Look at the parts of the eye in Figure 20.12 .
Light from an object passes first through the cornea .
This is a clear , protective covering on the outside of the eye .
You probably know people who need eyeglasses or contact lenses to see clearly .
This vision problem can be corrected with concave lenses , which curve inward .
The lenses focus images correctly on the retina .
Hyperopia is commonly called farsightedness .
People with hyperopia can see distant objects clearly , but nearby objects appear blurry .
Hyperopia occurs when images focus in back of the retina because the eyeball is too short .
This vision problem can be corrected with convex lenses , which curve outward .
Lenses are used to correct vision problems .
To learn about astigmatism , another common vision problem , watch this very short video : .
URL : Myopia is commonly called nearsightedness .
People with myopia can see nearby objects clearly , but distant objects appear blurry .
Myopia occurs when images focus in front of the retina because the eyeball is too long .
Both activities depend on the ears .
The brain then interprets the impulses and tells you what you are hearing .
To find out how the brain determines where a sound is coming from , watch this amusing video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : The parts of the ears involved in balance are the semicircular canals .
Like the cochlea , the semicircular canals contain liquid and are lined with tiny hair cells .
This causes the hair cells to bend .
The bending of the hair cells triggers nerve impulses that travel to the cerebellum in the brain .
The cerebellum uses the information to maintain balance .
The ears are organs that sense sound .
They also sense the position of the body and help maintain balance .
Suppose a car horn blows in the distance .
Sound waves spread through the air from the horn .
Some of the sound waves enter your ears and cause vibrations .
The vibrations trigger nerve impulses that travel to the brain through the auditory nerve .
Nerve cells that sense touch are found mainly in the skin .
Neurons that sense pain are also found inside the body inside the body in the tongue , joints , muscles , and other organs .
Neurons in the skin on your toe would sense the temperature of the water and send a message about it to the brain through the spinal cord .
The brain would process the information .
The sense of taste is controlled by sensory neurons on the tongue .
They are grouped in bundles called taste buds .
Your sense of smell plays a big role in your sense of taste .
You can use your sense of taste alone to learn that a food is sweet .
However , you have to use your sense of smell as well to learn that the food tastes like apple pie .
You can see taste buds on the tongue in Figure 20.16 .
Taste neurons sense chemicals in food .
When taste neurons sense chemicals , they send messages to the brain about them .
The brain then decides what you are tasting .
The sense of smell also involves sensory neurons that sense chemicals .
These neurons are found in the nose , and they sense chemicals in the air .
The endocrine system is a system of glands that release chemical messenger molecules into the blood stream .
The messenger molecules are called hormones .
Hormones act slowly compared with the rapid transmission of electrical impulses of the nervous system .
Endocrine hormones must travel through the bloodstream to the cells they control , and this takes time .
On the other hand , because endocrine hormones are released into the bloodstream , they travel to cells everywhere in the body .
For a good visual introduction to the endocrine system , watch this short video : http MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
An endocrine gland is a gland that secretes hormones into the bloodstream for transport around the body -LRB- instead of secreting hormones locally , like sweat glands in the skin -RRB- .
Major glands of the endocrine system are shown in Figure 20.17 .
The hypothalamus is actually part of the brain , but it also secretes hormones .
Some of its hormones go directly to the pituitary gland in the endocrine system .
These hypothalamus hormones tell the pituitary to either secrete or stop secreting its hormones .
In this way , the hypothalamus provides a link between the nervous and endocrine systems .
The hypothalamus also produces hormones that directly regulate body processes .
This hormone travels to the kidneys and stimulates them to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine .
The pituitary receives hormones from the hypothalamus .
Most pituitary hormones control other endocrine glands .
Thats why the pituitary gland is called the master gland of the endocrine system .
Table Pituitary Hormone Adrenocorticotropic -LRB- ACTH -RRB- hormone Target Glands/Cells adrenal glands Thyroid-stimulating -LRB- TSH -RRB- Growth hormone -LRB- GH -RRB- hormone thyroid gland Follicle-stimulating -LRB- FSH -RRB- hormone body cells ovaries or testes Luteinizing hormone -LRB- LH -RRB- ovaries or testes Prolactin -LRB- PRL -RRB- mammary glands Effects -LRB- s -RRB- Stimulates the cortex -LRB- outer layer -RRB- of the adrenal glands to secrete their hormones Stimulates the thyroid gland to se - crete its hormones Stimulates body cells to make pro- teins and grow Stimulates the ovaries to develop mature eggs ; stimulates the testes to produce sperm Stimulates the ovaries or testes to secrete sex hormones ; stimulates the ovaries to release eggs Stimulates the mammary glands to produce milk
The hormone adrenaline is secreted by the inner layer .
It prepares the body to respond to emergencies .
For example , it increases the amount of oxygen and glucose going to the muscles .
The gonads are glands that secrete sex hormones .
Male gonads are called testes .
The female gonads are called ovaries .
Sex hormones stimulate the changes of puberty .
Hormones secreted by the thyroid gland include thyroxin .
Thyroxin increases the rate of metabolism in cells throughout the body .
Hormones secreted by the pancreas include insulin .
Insulin helps cells absorb glucose from the blood .
Endocrine hormones travel throughout the body in the blood .
However , each endocrine hormone affects only certain cells , called target cells .
A target cell is affected by a given hormone because it has proteins on its surface to which the hormone can bind .
When the hormone binds to target cell proteins , it causes changes inside the cell .
For example , binding of the hormone might cause the release of enzymes inside the cell .
The enzymes then influence cell processes .
Endocrine hormones control many cell activities , so they are very important for homeostasis .
Low levels of thyroid hormones in the blood cause the release of hormones by the hypothalamus and pituitary gland .
These hormones stimulate the thyroid gland to secrete more hormones .
The opposite happens with high levels of thyroid hormones in the blood .
The hypothalamus and pituitary gland stop releasing hormones that stimulate the thyroid .
Most endocrine hormones are controlled by feedback loops .
In a feedback loop , the hormone produced by a gland feeds back to control its own production by the gland .
Most endocrine hormones are controlled by negative feedback loops .
. Negative feedback occurs when rising levels of a hormone feed back to decrease secretion of the hormone or when falling levels of the hormone feed back to increase its secretion .
It shows how levels of thyroid hormones regulate the thyroid gland .
This loop involves the hypothalamus and pituitary gland as well as the thyroid gland .
When it gets too high , they must give themselves an injection of insulin to bring it under control .
This may happen because the gland develops an abnormal lump of cells called a tumor .
For example , a tumor of the pituitary gland can cause secretion of too much growth hormone .
If this occurs in a child , it may result in very rapid growth and unusual tallness by adulthood .
This is called gigantism .
As a result , not enough insulin is secreted to maintain normal levels of glucose in the blood .
Patients with type 1 diabetes must regularly check the level of glucose in their blood .
An infectious disease is a disease that is caused by a pathogen .
A pathogen is an organism or virus that causes disease in another living thing .
Pathogens are commonly called germs .
There are several types of pathogens that cause diseases in human beings .
The different types are described in Table 21.1 .
The table also lists several diseases caused by each type of pathogen .
Many infectious diseases caused by these pathogens can be cured with medicines .
For example , antibiotic drugs can cure most diseases caused by bacteria .
A vaccine can prevent the spread of this pathogen .
Droplets are released when a person coughs or sneezes , as you can see in Figure 21.2 .
The droplets may be loaded with pathogens .
Other people may get sick if they breathe in the pathogens on the droplets .
Viruses that cause colds and flu can spread this way .
Other pathogens spread when they are deposited on objects or surfaces .
The fungus that causes athletes food spreads this way .
For example , you might pick up the fungus from the floor of a public shower .
You can also pick up viruses for colds and flu from doorknobs and other commonly touched surfaces .
Still other pathogens are spread by vectors .
A vector is an organism that carries pathogens from one person or animal to another .
They pick up pathogens when they bite an infected animal and then transmit the pathogens to the next animal they bite .
Ticks spread the bacteria that cause Lyme disease .
Mosquitoes spread the protozoa that cause malaria .
Some pathogens spread through food or water .
When harmful bacteria contaminate food , they cause foodborne illness , commonly called food poisoning .
An example of a pathogen that spreads through water is the protozoan named Giardia lamblia , described in Table 21.1 .
It causes a disease called giardiasis .
In the U.S. , the pathogen most commonly spread this way is HPV , or human papillomavirus .
Spend at least 20 seconds scrubbing with soap .
See Figure 21.3 for effective hand washing tips .
Avoid touching your eyes , nose , or mouth with unwashed hands .
This includes kissing , hugging , shaking hands , and sharing cups or eating utensils .
Cover your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or shirt sleeve , not your hands .
The best way to prevent diseases spread by vectors is to avoid contact with the vectors .
These habits will help keep your immune system healthy .
Using insect repellent can also reduce your risk of insect bites .
For example , there are vaccines to prevent measles , mumps , whooping cough , and chicken pox .
These vaccines are recommended for infants and young children .
You can also take the following steps to avoid picking up pathogens or spreading them to others .
Watch this video for additional information on preventing the spread of infectious diseases : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Cancer is a disease in which cells divide out of control .
Normally , the body has ways to prevent cells from dividing out of control .
Then the cells may start growing in other tissues .
However , in the case of cancer , these ways fail .
The rapidly dividing cells may form a mass of abnormal tissue called a tumor .
This is illustrated in Figure 21.4 .
URL : As a tumor increases in size , it may harm normal tissues around it .
Sometimes cancer cells break away from a tumor .
Most cancers are caused by mutations .
Figure 21.5 shows some of these chemicals .
Smoking tobacco or using smokeless tobacco increases the risk of cancer of the lung , mouth , throat , and urinary bladder .
Types of radiation that cause cancer include ultraviolet -LRB- UV -RRB- radiation and radon .
Radon is a naturally occurring radioactive gas that escapes from underground rocks .
Mutations that lead to cancer usually occur in genes that control the cell cycle .
Because of the mutations , abnormal cells are allowed to divide .
Some mutations that lead to cancer may be inherited .
However , most of the mutations are caused by environmental factors .
Common carcinogens include certain chemicals and some types of radiation .
Many different chemicals can cause cancer .
For example , tobacco contains dozens of chemicals , including nicotine , that have been shown to cause cancer .
Cancer occurs most often in adults , especially adults over the age of 50 .
The most common types of cancer in adults differ between males and females .
It occurs when the body makes abnormal white blood cells .
Most cases of lung cancer develop in people who smoke .
Many cases of cancer can be cured if the cancer is diagnosed and treated early .
Treatment often involves removing a tumor with surgery .
This may be followed by other types of treatments .
These treatments may include drugs and radiation , both of which target and kill cancer cells .
Its important to know the warning signs of cancer so it can be diagnosed as early as possible .
Having warning signs doesnt mean that you have cancer , but you should check with a doctor to be sure .
Making healthy lifestyle choices can help prevent some types of cancer .
Diabetes occurs when the pancreas doesnt make enough insulin or else the bodys cells are resistant to the effects of insulin .
Insulin is a hormone that helps cells absorb glucose from the blood .
When there is too little insulin or cells do not respond to it , the blood contains too much glucose .
High glucose levels in the blood can damage blood vessels and other cells in the body .
The kidneys work harder to filter the extra glucose from the blood and excrete it in urine .
This leads to frequent urination , which in turn causes excessive thirst .
Watch this short video for an animated introduction to diabetes , its causes , and its consequences : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Type 1 diabetes is caused by the immune system attacking and destroying normal cells of the pancreas .
As a result , the cells can no longer produce insulin .
regular physical activity , which helps the body use insulin more efficiently .
Why the immune system acts this way is not known for certain .
This type of diabetes usually develops in childhood or adolescence .
At present , there is no known way to prevent the development of type 1 diabetes .
Treatment of type 1 diabetes includes : taking several insulin injections every day or using an insulin pump -LRB- see Figure 21.7 -RRB- .
monitoring blood glucose levels several times a day .
eating a healthy diet that spreads out carbohydrate intake throughout the day .
Type 2 diabetes occurs when body cells no longer respond normally to insulin .
Like people with type 1 diabetes , people with type 2 diabetes must frequently check their blood glucose .
The pancreas still makes insulin , but the cells of the body cant use it .
Being overweight and having high blood pressure increase the chances of developing type 2 diabetes .
This type of diabetes usually develops in adulthood .
Some cases of type 2 diabetes can be cured with weight loss .
However , most people with the disease need to take medicine to control their blood glucose .
The immune system is the body system that normally fights infections and defends against other causes of disease .
When the immune system is working well , it usually keeps you from getting sick .
But like any other body system , the immune system can have problems and develop diseases .
An autoimmune disease is a disease in which the immune system attacks the bodys own cells .
However , they can be treated with medicines that weaken the immune systems attack on normal cells .
This causes weakness and pain that gradually get worse over time .
This causes joint damage and pain .
An allergy is a disorder in which the immune system responds to a harmless substance as though it was a pathogen .
Any substance that causes an allergy is called an allergen .
Ragweed , shown blooming in Figure 21.8 , causes more pollen allergies than any other plant .
Allergy symptoms can range from mild to severe .
Mild symptoms might include itchy eyes , sneezing , and a runny nose .
Keep in mind that it is the immune system and not the allergen that causes the allergy symptoms .
Allergy symptoms can be treated with medications such as antihistamines .
Severe allergic reactions may require an injection of the hormone epinephrine .
These treatments lessen or counter the immune systems response .
Often , allergy symptoms can be prevented .
One way is to avoid exposure to the allergens that cause your symptoms .
Some people receive allergy shots to help prevent allergic reactions .
The shots contain tiny amounts of allergens .
After many months or years of shots , the immune system gets used to the allergens and no longer reacts to them .
To see in greater detail how allergies occur , watch this animated video : .
People with this type of allergy generally have seasonal allergies that come back year after year .
Symptoms commonly include watery eyes and nasal congestion .
The male reproductive system has two main functions : producing sperm and releasing testosterone .
For example , it causes the voice to deepen and facial hair to start growing .
During adulthood , testosterone is needed for the production of sperm .
Sperm form when certain cells in the male reproductive system divide by meiosis to form haploid cells .
An adult male may produce millions of sperm each day !
During adolescence , testosterone causes most of the changes associated with puberty .
The male reproductive organs include the penis , testes , epididymis , vas deferens , and prostate gland .
These organs are shown in Figure 22.1 .
The scrotum also contains the epididymis .
The figure also shows some other parts of the male reproductive system .
Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it below .
For a cartoon about the male reproductive system , watch this video : http MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : The penis is an external , cylinder-shaped organ that contains the urethra .
The urethra is the tube that carries urine out of the body .
The two testes -LRB- testis , singular -RRB- are oval organs that produce sperm and secrete testosterone .
They are located inside a sac called the scrotum that hangs down outside the body .
They have a structure that suits them well to perform their function .
The tail of the sperm moves like a propeller .
It spins around and around and pushes the sperm forward .
The head of the sperm contains the nucleus .
The nucleus holds the chromosomes .
In humans , the nucleus of a sperm cell contains 23 chromosomes .
The acrosome on the head contains enzymes that help the sperm penetrate an egg .
The connecting piece of the sperm is packed with mitochondria .
Mitochondria are organelles in cells that produce energy .
Sperm use the energy to move .
It takes up to two months for mature sperm to form .
The mature sperm remain in the epididymis until it is time for them to leave the body .
Sperm leave the epididymis through the vas deferens .
As they travel through the vas deferens , they pass by the prostate and other glands .
Semen travels through the urethra and leaves the body through the penis .
Special cells in the testes go through mitosis to make identical copies of themselves .
The copies of the original cells divide by meiosis .
This results in haploid cells called spermatids .
These cells lack tails and can not yet swim .
Spermatids move from the testes to the epididymis , where they slowly mature .
Two functions of the female reproductive system are similar to the functions of the male reproductive system : producing gametes and secreting a major sex hormone .
Estrogen has two major roles : During adolescence , estrogen causes the changes of puberty .
During adulthood , estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs from the ovaries .
The female reproductive system has another important function , which is not found in males .
It supports a baby as it develops before birth .
The female reproductive organs include the ovaries , fallopian tubes , uterus , and vagina .
These organs are shown in Figure 22.3 , along with some other structures of the female reproductive system .
The egg then passes through the fallopian tube to the uterus .
If an egg is fertilized , this occurs in the fallopian tube .
The uterus is where a baby develops until birth .
The walls of the uterus stretch to accommodate the growing fetus .
The muscles in the walls contract to push the baby out during birth .
The uterus is connected to the vagina by a small opening called the cervix .
The vagina is a cylinder-shaped organ that opens to the outside of the body .
The other end joins with the uterus .
Sperm deposited in the vagina swim up through the cervix , into the uterus , and from there into a
Each ovary contains thousands of eggs .
However , the eggs do not develop fully until a female has gone through puberty .
Then , about once a month , an egg is released by one of the ovaries .
The ovaries also secrete estrogen .
The two fallopian tubes are thin tubes that are connected to the uterus and extend almost to the ovaries .
The upper end of each fallopian tube has fingers -LRB- called fimbriae -RRB- that sweep an egg into the fallopian tube when it is released by the ovary .
When a baby girl is born , her ovaries contain all of the eggs they will ever produce .
But these eggs are not fully developed .
Then , just one egg develops each month until she reaches her 40s or early 50s .
Unlike a sperm cell , the egg lacks a tail and contains a lot of cytoplasm .
Egg production takes place in the ovaries .
The follicle and egg grow larger and go through other changes .
This is called ovulation .
Fertilization may occur if sperm reach the egg while it is passing through the fallopian tube .
If this happens , the egg finally completes meiosis .
This results in two daughter cells that differ in size .
The smaller cell is called a polar body .
Before birth , special cells in the ovaries go through mitosis to make identical daughter cells .
The daughter cells then start to divide by meiosis .
After puberty , an egg develops in an ovary about once a month .
As you can see in Figure 22.4 , the egg rests in a nest of cells called a follicle .
The menstrual cycle is a series of changes in the reproductive system of mature females that repeats every month on average .
Menstruation is also called a menstrual period .
When the menstrual period ends , the cycle begins repeats .
These changes include the development of an egg and follicle in the ovary .
While the egg is developing , other changes are taking place in the uterus .
The lining prepares the uterus to receive a fertilized egg if fertilization actually takes place .
Blood and other tissues from the lining pass through the vagina and leave the body .
This is called menstruation .
When a sperm penetrates the cell membrane of an egg , it triggers the egg to complete meiosis .
The sperm also undergoes changes .
Its tail falls off , and its nucleus fuses with the nucleus of the egg .
The resulting cell , called a zygote , contains the diploid number of chromosomes .
Half of the chromosomes come from the egg , and half come from the sperm .
You can watch the process of fertilization and the development of a baby until birth in this amazing video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The zygote spends the next few days traveling down the fallopian tube toward the uterus , where it will take up residence .
It soon forms a tiny , fluid-filled ball of cells called a blastocyst .
The inner layer , called the embryoblast , will develop into the new human being .
The outer layer , called the trophoblast , will develop into other structures needed to support the new organism .
The blastocyst continues down the fallopian tube until it reaches the uterus , about 4 or 5 days after fertilization .
When the outer cells of the blastocyst contact cells lining the uterus -LRB- the endometrium in Figure 22.5 -RRB- , the blastocyst embeds itself in the uterine lining .
This process is called implantation .
After implantation occurs , the blastocyst is called an embryo .
The embryonic stage lasts from the end of the first week following fertilization through the end of the eighth week .
During this time , the embryo grows in size and becomes more complex .
Most organs also start to form .
You can see some of the specific changes that take place during weeks four to eight of the embryonic period in Figure 22.6 .
From the eighth week following fertilization until birth , the developing human being is called a fetus .
Birth typically occurs at about 38 weeks after fertilization , so the fetal period generally lasts about 30 weeks .
During this time , the organs complete their development .
The fetus also grows rapidly in length and weight .
Some of the specific changes that occur during the fetal stage are listed in Figure 22.7 .
By the 38th week , the fetus is fully developed and ready to be born .
A 38-week fetus normally ranges from about 36 to 51 centimeters -LRB- 1420 inches -RRB- in length and weighs between 2.7 and 4.6 kilograms -LRB- about 610 pounds -RRB- .
The fetus could not grow and develop without oxygen and nutrients from the mother .
Wastes from the fetus also must be removed in order for it to survive .
This is a long tube that contains two arteries and a vein .
Blood from the fetus enters the placenta through the umbilical arteries .
Another structure that supports the fetus is the amniotic sac .
This is a membrane that surrounds and protects the fetus .
It contains amniotic fluid , which consists of water and dissolved substances .
The fluid allows the fetus to move freely until it grows to fill most of the available space .
The fluid also cushions the fetus and helps protect it from injury .
The exchange of these substances between the mother and fetus occurs through the placenta .
The placenta is a temporary organ that starts to form shortly after implantation .
The placenta continues to develop and grow to meet the needs of the growing fetus .
A fully developed placenta , like the one in Figure 22.8 , is made up of a large mass of blood vessels from both mother and fetus .
The maternal and fetal vessels are close together but separated by tiny spaces .
The fetus is connected to the placenta through the umbilical cord .
The pregnant mother plays a critical role in the development of the embryo and fetus .
She must avoid toxic substances such as alcohol , which can damage the developing offspring .
She also must provide all the nutrients and other substances needed for normal growth and development .
Most nutrients are needed in greater amounts by a pregnant woman because she is literally eating for two people .
Thats why its important for a woman to eat plenty of nutritious foods during pregnancy .
The pregnant woman in Figure 22.9 is eating a variety of fresh fruits , which provide energy , vitamins , and other nutrients .
Near the time of birth , the amniotic sac breaks in a gush of liquid .
Labor usually begins within a day of this event .
Labor involves contractions of the muscular walls of the uterus .
With the mothers help , the contractions eventually push the fetus out of the uterus and through the vagina .
Within seconds of birth , the umbilical cord is cut .
Without this connection to the placenta , the baby cant exchange gases , so carbon dioxide quickly builds up in the babys blood .
This stimulates the babys brain to trigger breathing , and the newborn takes her first breath .
For the first year after birth , a baby is referred to as an infant .
Childhood begins at the age of two years and continues until puberty .
Adolescence begins with puberty and lasts until adulthood .
The first year of life after birth is called infancy .
During infancy , a baby grows very quickly .
The babys length typically doubles and her weight triples by her first birthday .
Many other important changes also occur during infancy : The baby starts smiling , usually by about 6 weeks of age -LRB- see Figure 22.10 -RRB- .
The baby starts noticing people and grabbing toys and other objects The baby teeth start to come in , usually by 6 months of age .
The baby begins making babbling sounds .
By the end of the first year , the baby may be saying a few words , such as Mama and Dada .
The baby learns to sit , crawl , and stand .
By the end of the first year , the baby may be starting to walk .
Childhood begins after the babys first birthday and continues until puberty .
Between 1 and 3 years of age , a child is called a toddler .
Children continue to develop new motor skills .
For example , many young children learn how to ride a tricycle and then a bicycle .
Most learn how to play games and sports .
By the age of 6 years , children start losing their baby teeth .
Most children have started school by this age .
During the later years of childhood , children also start to develop friendships and become less dependent on their parents .
Toddlers learn many new words and starts putting them together in simple sentences .
Motor skills also develop quickly during the toddler stage .
By the age of 3 years , most children can run and climb steps .
They can also feed themselves , and most can use the toilet .
From age 3 until puberty , growth slows down .
The body also changes shape .
Puberty is the stage of life when a child becomes sexually mature .
Puberty lasts from about 10 to 16 years of age in girls and from about 12 to 18 years of age in boys .
The testes start producing sperm .
The voice becomes deeper as the larynx in the throat grows larger -LRB- see Figure 22.12 -RRB- .
But boys grow more quickly that girls do , and their period of rapid growth also lasts longer .
In addition , boys generally start puberty later than girls , so they have a longer period of childhood growth .
In both girls and boys , puberty begins when the pituitary gland signals the gonads -LRB- ovaries or testes -RRB- to start secreting sex hormones -LRB- estrogen in girls , testosterone in boys -RRB- .
Sex hormones , in turn , cause many other changes to take place .
In girls , estrogen causes the following changes to occur : The uterus and ovaries grow .
The ovaries start releasing eggs .
In boys , testosterone causes these changes to take place : The penis and testes grow .
Adolescence begins with the physical changes of puberty .
Teens usually start spending more time with their peers , like the girls in Figure 22.13 .
Adolescents usually spend much more time with their friends and classmates than they do with family members .
It also includes many other changes , including mental , emotional , and social changes .
During adolescence : Teens develop new thinking abilities .
Teens try to establish a sense of identity .
Teens may become physically mature by the age 16 years , but they are not adults in a legal sense until they are older .
For example , in the U.S. , you must be 18 years old to vote or serve in the armed forces .
Once adulthood begins , it can be divided into three stages : early , middle , and late adulthood .
Early adulthood refers to the 20s and early 30s .
Many people become engaged or marry during this time .
During this stage of life , people start showing signs of aging .
Their hair may thin and slowly turn gray .
Their skin develops wrinkles .
For example , cardiovascular diseases , cancer , and type 2 diabetes become more common in people of middle age .
This is also the stage when many people raise a family and strive to attain career goals .
Late adulthood begins in the mid-60s and continues until death .
This is the stage of life when most people retire from work .
For example , the man in Figure During late adulthood , the risk of developing diseases such as cardiovascular diseases and cancer continues to rise .
Their senses may start failing , and their reflex time typically increases .
As a result , common diseases like the flu may become more serious and even lead to death .
The majority of late adults develop arthritis , and as many as one in four develop Alzheimers disease .
Despite problems such as these , many people remain healthy and active into their 80s and even 90s .
A sexually transmitted infection -LRB- STI -RRB- is a disease that spreads mainly through sexual contact .
STIs are caused by pathogens that enter the body through the reproductive organs .
Many STIs also spread through body fluids such as blood .
For example , a shared tattoo needle is one way that some STIs can spread .
Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her infant during birth .
One reason is that young people are more likely to engage in risky behaviors .
Only some STIs can be cured with medicines ; others can not be cured .
Instead , they may believe myths about STIs , like those in Table 22.1 .
Getting STIs is no big deal , because they can be cured with medicines .
Fact The only sure way to avoid getting STIs is to practice abstinence from sexual activity .
A number of STIs are caused by bacteria .
Bacterial STIs can usually be cured with antibiotics .
This is followed a few months later by a rash and flu-like symptoms .
If syphilis isnt treated , it can eventually damage the heart , brain , and other organs and even cause death .
However , some people with bacterial STIs may not have symptoms so they fail to get treatment .
Left untreated , these infections may damage reproductive organs and lead to an inability to have children .
Symptoms may include burning during urination and a discharge from the vagina or penis .
Symptoms may include painful urination and a discharge from the vagina or penis .
Several STIs are caused by viruses .
Viral STIs cant be cured with antibiotics .
AIDS develops if the number of lymphocytes drops to a very low level .
Medicines can delay the progression of an HIV infection and may prevent AIDS from developing .
Genital warts is an STI caused by human papilloma virus -LRB- HPV -RRB- , which is pictured in Figure 22.15 .
Genital warts cant be cured , but a vaccine can prevent most HPV infections .
The vaccine is recommended for boys and girls starting at 11 or 12 years of age .
Its important to prevent HPV infections because they may lead to cancer later in life .
Other drugs may help control the symptoms of viral STIs , but the infections usually last for life .
Genital herpes is a common STI caused by a herpes virus .
The virus causes painful blisters on the penis or near the vaginal opening .
The blisters generally go away on their own , but they may return repeatedly throughout life .
There is no cure for genital herpes , but medicines can help prevent or shorten outbreaks .
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome -LRB- AIDS -RRB- is caused by human immunodeficiency virus -LRB- HIV -RRB- .
HIV destroys lymphocytes that normally fight infections .
Other reproductive system disorders include injuries and noninfectious diseases .
Most common disorders of the male reproductive system involve the testes .
In teens , such injuries occur most often while playing sports .
Injuries to the testes are likely to be very painful and cause bruising and swelling .
It occurs when cells in the testes grow out of control and form a tumor .
If found early , cancer of the testes usually can be cured with surgery .
Disorders of the female reproductive system may involve the vagina , uterus , or ovaries .
A cyst is a sac filled with fluid or other material .
Ovarian cysts are usually harmless and often disappear on their own .
However , some cysts may be painful and require surgery .
Many females experience abdominal cramps during menstruation .
Exercise , heat , or medication may help relieve the pain .
It occurs when cells in the breast grow out of control and form a tumor .
Breast cancer is rare in teens but becomes more common as females get older .
Regular screening is recommended for most women starting around age 40 .
If found early , breast cancer usually can be cured with surgery .
Symptoms include redness and itching of the vagina .
Yeast normally grow in the vagina .
A yeast infection can be treated with medication .
Cysts may develop in the ovaries .
Maintaining overall good health will help keep your reproductive system healthy .
If you are a boy , wear a protective cup if you play a contact sport .
This will help protect the testes from injury .
You can learn how by watching this video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
In addition , the following practices will help keep the reproductive system healthy : Keep the genitals clean .
This includes contact with blood or dirty needles as well as sexual activity .
If you are a girl and use tampons , be sure to change them every 4 to 6 hours .
This will reduce your risk of toxic shock syndrome .
This is a very dangerous condition that may occur if tampons are left in too long .
They range from microscopic bacteria to gigantic blue whales -LRB- see Figure must be obtained from the environment .
They include all the organisms that live there as well as the remains of dead organisms .
The levels are depicted in Figure 23.2 and described below .
For a video introduction to the levels of organization in ecology , click on this link : .
A population is a group of individuals of the same species that live in the same area .
Members of the same population generally interact with each other .
A community is made up of all the populations of all the species that live in the same area .
Populations in a community also generally interact with each other .
Population size influences the chances of a species surviving or going extinct .
If a species populations become very small , the species may be at risk of going extinct .
Density is a measure of how crowded or spread out the individuals in a population are on average .
For example , a population of 100 deer that live in an area of 10 square kilometers has a population density of 10 deer per square kilometer .
Different patterns characterize different species and types of environments , as you can read in the figure .
Whether its populations are growing or shrinking in size may be another indicator of a species health .
Individuals may be added to a population through births and the migration of individuals into the population .
Both are represented in Figure 23.4 .
With exponential growth , the population starts out growing slowly .
As population size increases , the growth rate also increases .
This type of growth generally occurs only when a population is living under ideal conditions .
With logistic growth , the population starts out growing slowly , and then the rate of growth increasesbut only to a point .
The rate of growth tapers off as the population size approaches its carrying capacity .
Carrying capacity is the largest population size that can be supported in an area without harming the environment .
This type of growth characterizes many populations .
Individuals may be lost from a population through deaths and the migration of individuals out of the population .
A positive growth rate means that the population is increasing in size because more people are being added than lost .
A negative growth rate means that the population is decreasing in size because more people are being lost than added .
Populations may show different patterns of growth .
The growth pattern depends partly on the conditions under which a population lives .
Learn more about population pyramids and what you can learn from them , watch this TED video : http : / / w MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The age-sex structure of a population may influence the population growth rate .
For example , if there are many individuals of reproductive age , there are likely to be many births , causing the population to grow rapidly .
The age-sex structure of a population is often represented with a special bar graph called a population pyramid .
The graph in the figure actually has a pyramid shape because the bars become narrower from younger to older ages .
Human beings have been called the most successful weed species on Earth .
Like garden weeds , populations of human beings grow quickly and disperse rapidly .
The early human population grew very slowly .
However , as the population grew larger , it started to grow more rapidly .
The earliest members of the human species evolved around 200,000 years ago in Africa .
Early humans lived in small populations of nomadic hunters and gatherers .
Birth rates went up because there was more food and settled life had other advantages .
Death rates also rose because of crowded living conditions and diseases that spread from domestic animals .
Because the higher birth rates were matched by higher death rates , the human population continued to grow very slowly .
Human beings remained in Africa until about 40,000 years ago .
By 10,000 years ago , the first human beings colonized the Americas .
During this long period of time , the total number of human beings increased very slowly .
Birth rates were fairly high but so were death rates , producing low rates of population growth .
Human beings invented agriculture about 10,000 years ago .
This provided a bigger , more dependable food supply .
It also allowed people to settle down in villages and cities for the first time .
Major changes in the human population first began in the 1700s .
These changes occurred mainly in Europe , North America , and a few other places that became industrialized .
Water supplies were cleaned up and sewage was disposed of more safely .
Better farming techniques and machines increased the food supply and the distribution of food .
For all these reasons , death rates fell , especially in children .
Birth rates , on the other hand , remained high .
This resulted in faster population growth .
Before long , birth rates also started to fall .
People started having fewer children because large families became too expensive .
For example , with better farming machines , farm families no longer needed as many children to work in the fields .
Laws were also passed that required children to go to school .
First death rates fell .
Having many children became too costly .
Eventually , birth rates fell to match death rates -LRB- Stage 4 -RRB- .
As a result , population growth slowed down .
Then , somewhat later , birth rates also fell .
These changes in death and birth rates affected the rate of population growth and are referred to as the demographic transition .
The graph in Figure 23.7 shows the stages in which the demographic transition occurred .
In Stage 2 , death rates fell while birth rates remained high .
Why did death rates fall ?
Just as they did in Europe and North America , death rates have fallen throughout the world .
These populations seem to be stuck in Stage 2 or 3 of the demographic transition .
They have high population growth rates because low death rates are not matched by equally low birth rates .
That number is increasing rapidly .
Otherwise , the planet may be ruined for future generations of human beings and other species .
More than 200,000 people are added to the human population each day !
At this rate , the human population will pass 9 billion by 2050 .
Many experts think that the human population has reached its carrying capacity .
An even larger human population may cause severe environmental problems .
To solve these problems , two approaches may be needed : Slow down human population growth so there are fewer people .
Distribute Earths resources more fairly so that everyone has enough .
Figure 23.18 shows the locations of the worlds major terrestrial biomes .
The major plants in a given biome , in turn , help determine the types of animals and other organisms that can live there .
Which plants grow in a given biome depends mainly on climate .
The major climatic factors affecting plant growth are temperature and moisture .
You can learn more about these and other terrestrial biomes by watching this video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Phytoplankton consist of microscopic bacteria and tiny algae that make food by photosynthesis .
Unlike terrestrial biomes , which are determined mainly by temperature and moisture , aquatic biomes are determined mainly by sunlight and dissolved substances in the water .
Only the top 200 meters or so of water receive enough sunlight for photosynthesis .
This part of the water is called the photic zone .
Below 200 meters , there is too little sunlight for photosynthesis to take place .
This part of the water is called the aphotic zone .
In this zone , food must come from other sources .
It may be made by chemosynthesis , in which microorganisms use energy in chemicals instead of sunlight to make food .
Or , food may drift down from the water above .
In addition to sunlight , aquatic producers also need dissolved oxygen and nutrients .
Water near the surface generally contains more dissolved oxygen than deeper water .
Many nutrients enter the water from the land .
Therefore , water nearer shore usually contains more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore .
Water in a lake generally forms three different zones based on water depth and distance from shore .
A variety of zooplankton and fish also occupy this zone .
There isnt enough light for photosynthesis in this zone , so most organisms here eat dead organisms that drift down from the water above .
Organisms in the profundal zone may include clams , snails , and some species of fish .
The shallow water near the shore is called the littoral zone .
Producers include algae and aquatic plants -LRB- see Figure 23.20 -RRB- .
Animals in this zone may include insects , crustaceans , fish , and turtles .
The top layer of water farther from shore is called the limnetic zone .
There is enough light for photosynthesis and plenty of dissolved oxygen .
However , dissolved nutrients tend not to be as plentiful as they are in the littoral zone .
Zones in the oceans include the intertidal , pelagic , and benthic zones .
The types of organisms found in these ocean zones are also determined by such factors as depth of water and distance from shore , among other factors .
All the water in the open ocean is called the pelagic zone .
It is further divided by depth : The top 200 meters of water is the photic zone .
Producers here include seaweeds and phytoplankton .
This is the narrow strip along a coastline that is covered by water at high tide and exposed to air at low tide .
Producers here include phytoplankton and algae .
Other organisms include barnacles , snails , crabs , and mussels .
The chemical elements and water that are needed by living things keep recycling on Earth .
Thats why their cycles are called biogeochemical cycles .
For example , a chemical element or water might move from organisms -LRB- bio -RRB- to the atmosphere or ocean -LRB- geo -RRB- and back to organisms again .
Elements or water may be held for various periods of time in different parts of a biogeochemical cycle .
An exchange pool is part of a cycle that holds a substance for a short period of time .
A reservoir is part of a cycle that holds a substance for a long period of time .
Life cant exist without water .
Watch this video for an excellent visual introduction to the water cycle : .
Most organisms contain a large amount of water , and many live in water .
However , individual water molecules keep moving through the water cycle .
It takes place on , above , and below Earths surface , as shown in Figure 24.7 .
During the water cycle , water occurs in three different states : gas -LRB- water vapor -RRB- , liquid -LRB- water -RRB- , and solid -LRB- ice -RRB- .
Many processes are involved as water changes state to move through the cycle .
Water changes to a gas by three different processes called evaporation , sublimation , and transpiration .
Evaporation takes place when water on Earths surface changes to water vapor .
The sun heats the water and gives water molecules enough energy to escape into the atmosphere .
Most evaporation occurs from the surface of the ocean .
Sublimation takes place when snow and ice on Earths surface change directly to water vapor without first melting to form liquid water .
This also happens because of heat from the sun .
Transpiration takes place when plants release water vapor through pores in their leaves called stomata .
Rising air currents carry water vapor into the atmosphere .
As the water vapor rises in the atmosphere , it cools and condenses .
These masses of ice can store frozen water for hundreds of years or even longer .
Condensation may also form fog or dew .
Some living things , like the lizard in Figure 24.8 , depend directly on these sources of liquid water .
The water droplets may form clouds .
If the droplets get big enough , they fall as precipitation .
Precipitation is any form of water that falls from the atmosphere .
Most precipitation falls into the ocean .
Eventually , this water evaporates again and repeats the water cycle .
Some frozen precipitation becomes part of ice caps and glaciers .
Precipitation that falls on land may flow over the surface of the ground .
This water is called runoff .
Some precipitation that falls on land soaks into the ground .
This water becomes groundwater .
Groundwater may seep out of the ground at a spring or into a body of water such as the ocean .
Some groundwater is taken up by plant roots .
Water may be stored in an aquifer for thousands of years .
Biochemical compounds consist of chains of carbon atoms and just a few other elements .
Like water , carbon is constantly recycled through the biotic and abiotic factors of ecosystems .
The carbon cycle includes carbon in sedimentary rocks and fossil fuels under the ground , the ocean , the atmosphere , and living things .
The diagram in Figure 24.9 represents the carbon cycle .
Major reservoirs of carbon include sedimentary rocks , fossil fuels , and the ocean .
Sediments from dead organisms may form carbon-containing sedimentary rocks .
Alternatively , the sediments may form carbon-rich fossil fuels , which include oil , natural gas , and coal .
Carbon can be stored in these reservoirs for millions of years .
However , if fossil fuels are extracted and burned , the stored carbon enters the atmosphere as carbon dioxide .
Natural processes , such as volcanic eruptions , can also release underground carbon from rocks into the atmosphere .
Water erosion by runoff , rivers , and streams dissolves carbon in rocks and carries it to the ocean .
Ocean water near the surface dissolves carbon dioxide from the atmosphere .
Dissolved carbon may be stored in the deep ocean for thousands of years .
Major exchange pools of carbon include organisms and the atmosphere .
Photosynthesis by plants and other producers removes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to make organic compounds for living things .
Decomposition of dead organisms and organic wastes releases carbon back to the atmosphere , soil , or ocean .
Nitrogen is another common element found in living things .
Plants absorb nitrates through their roots .
This is called assimilation .
Most of the nitrates are produced by bacteria that live in soil or in the roots of plants called legumes .
Nitrogen-fixing bacteria change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to nitrates in soil .
When organisms die and decompose , their nitrogen is returned to the soil as ammonium ions .
Nitrifying bacteria change some of the ammonium ions into nitrates .
The other ammonium ions are changed into nitrogen gas by denitrifying bacteria .
Nitrogen gas makes up 78 percent of Earths atmosphere .
In the nitrogen cycle , nitrogen flows back and forth between the atmosphere and living things .
Several different types of bacteria play major roles in the cycle .
Animals get nitrogen by eating plants or other organisms that eat plants .
The only form of nitrogen that plants can use is in chemical compounds called nitrates .
Fossil fuels are burned in power plants , factories , motor vehicles , and home heating systems .
Ranching and using chemicals such as fertilizers also cause outdoor air pollution .
Erosion of soil in farm fields , mining activities , and construction sites adds dust particles to the air as well .
Some specific outdoor air pollutants are described in Table 25.1 .
Outdoor air pollution causes serious human health problems .
Air pollution may trigger asthma attacks and heart attacks in people with underlying health problems .
In fact , more people die each year from air pollution than automobile accidents .
Air pollution may also cause acid rain .
Acids form in the atmosphere when nitrogen and sulfur oxides mix with water in air .
Nitrogen and sulfur oxides come mainly from motor vehicle exhaust and coal burning .
If acid rain falls into lakes , it lowers the pH of the water and may kill aquatic organisms .
Acid rain also damages stone buildings , bridges , and statues , like the one in Figure 25.1 .
Another major problem caused by air pollution is global climate change .
Gases such as carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels increase the greenhouse effect and raise Earths temperature .
Adding more heat energy to Earths atmosphere also causes more extreme weather and changes in precipitation patterns .
Global warming is already causing food and water shortages and species extinctions .
These problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change .
It occurs when certain gases in the atmosphere , including carbon dioxide , radiate the suns heat back down to Earths surface .
Without greenhouse gases in the atmosphere , the heat would escape into space .
The natural greenhouse effect of Earths atmosphere keeps the planets temperature within a range that can support life .
It increases the greenhouse effect and causes Earths average temperature to rise .
Radon is a radioactive gas that may seep into buildings from rocks underground .
Exposure to radon gas may cause lung cancer .
Indoor furniture , carpets , and paints may release toxic compounds into the air as well .
Other possible sources of indoor air pollution include dust , mold , and pet dander .
Steps home owners can take to improve indoor air quality include : keeping the home clean so it is as free as possible from dust , mold , and pet dander .
making sure that fuel-burning appliances are working correctly and venting properly .
installing carbon monoxide alarms like the one in Figure 25.4 at every level of the home .
Runoff dissolves fertilizer as it flows over farm fields , lawns , and golf courses .
It carries the dissolved fertilizer into bodies of water .
More dissolved fertilizer may enter a body of water at the mouth of a river , but there is generally no single point where this type of pollution enters the water .
Thats why this type of water pollution is called nonpoint-source pollution .
When fertilizer ends up in bodies of water , the added nutrients cause excessive growth of algae .
This is called an algal bloom .
Eventually , the algae in an algal bloom die and decompose .
Their decomposition uses up oxygen in the water so that the water becomes hypoxic -LRB- without oxygen -RRB- .
Wetlands also provide breeding grounds for many different species of organisms .
This has occurred in many bodies of fresh water and large areas of the ocean , creating dead zones .
A very large dead zone exists in the Gulf of Mexico -LRB- see Figure 25.6 -RRB- .
Nutrients carried into the Gulf by the Mississippi River caused this dead zone .
Cutting down on the use of chemical fertilizers is one way to prevent dead zones in bodies of water .
Wetlands are habitats such as swamps , marshes , and bogs where the ground is soggy or covered with water much of the year .
Wetlands slow down and filter runoff before it reaches bodies of water .
Unlike runoff , which enters bodies of water everywhere , some sources of pollution enter the water at a single point .
Waste water from a factory might contain dangerous chemicals such as strong acids , mercury , or lead .
Water from a sewage treatment plant might contain untreated or partially treated sewage .
Such pollution can make water dangerous for drinking or other uses .
You can learn more about the problem of sewage contaminating the water in U.S. coastal communities by watching this video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : In poor nations , many people have no choice but to drink water from polluted sources .
Drinking sewage-contaminated water causes waterborne diseases , due to pathogens such as protozoa , viruses , or bacteria .
If heated water is released into a body of water , it may cause thermal pollution .
This water is heated and then returned to the natural environment at a higher temperature .
Warm water cant hold as much dissolved oxygen as cool water , so an increase in the temperature of water decreases the amount of oxygen it contains .
Fish and other organisms adapted to a particular temperature range and oxygen concentration may be killed by the change in water temperature .
The ocean is huge but even this body of water is becoming seriously polluted .
One way that the ocean is becoming polluted is with trash , mainly plastics .
The waste comes from shipping accidents , landfill erosion , and the dumping of trash .
Plastics may take hundreds or even thousands of years to break down .
Some organisms may swallow plastic bags , for example , and others may be strangled by plastic six-pack rings .
You can see some of the trash that routinely washes up on coastlines in Figure 25.7 .
Watch this video to learn more about them : .
Ocean water normally dissolves some of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere .
As a result , ocean water is also dissolving more carbon dioxide .
When carbon dioxide dissolves in water , it forms a weak acid .
With higher levels of dissolved carbon dioxide in ocean water , the water becomes more acidic .
This process is called ocean acidification .
Ocean acidification can kill some aquatic organisms , including corals and shellfish .
Both effects of acidification interfere with marine food webs , threatening the survival of many aquatic organisms .
Renewable resources are natural resources that are remade by natural processes as quickly as people use them .
Examples of renewable resources include sunlight and wind .
Using resources in this way is called sustainable use .
Metals and some other minerals are considered renewable as well because they are not destroyed when they are used .
They can reproduce to replace themselves .
However , living things can be over-used or misused to the point of extinction .
For example , over-fishing has caused some of the best fishing spots in the ocean to be nearly depleted , threatening entire fish species with extinction .
To be truly renewable , living things must be used wisely .
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that cant be remade or else take too long to remake to keep up with human use .
Plants need soil to grow , and plants are the basis of terrestrial ecosystems .
However , it takes millions of years for soil to form , so from a human point of view , it is a nonrenewable resource .
This means taking steps to avoid soil erosion and contamination of soil by toxins such as oil spills .
Fossil fuels form from the remains of plants and animals over hundreds of millions of years .
At current rates of use , oil and natural gas will be used up in just a few decades , and coal will be used up in a couple of centuries .
Uranium is a naturally occurring chemical element that cant be remade .
It will run out sooner or later if nuclear energy continues to be used .
People worldwide depend far more on these energy sources than any others .
Figure 25.10 shows the worldwide consumption of energy sources by type in 2010 .
Nonrenewable energy sources accounted for 83 percent of the total energy used .
Fossil fuels and the uranium needed for nuclear power will soon be used up if we continue to consume them at these rates .
Using fossil fuels and nuclear energy creates other problems as well .
The burning of fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere .
This is one of the major greenhouse gases causing global climate change .
Nuclear power creates another set of problems , including the disposal of radioactive waste .
Switching to renewable energy sources solves many of the problems associated with nonrenewable energy .
Biomass energy is energy provided by burning or decomposing organic matter .
For example , when garbage decomposes in a landfill , it releases methane gas .
This gas can be captured and burned to produce electricity .
Crops such as corn can also be converted into a liquid fuel and added to gasoline .
Although biomass is renewable , burning it produces carbon dioxide , similar to fossil fuels .
Figure 25.11 represents three different renewable energy sources : solar , wind , and biomass energy .
The three types are described below .
You can watch Bill Nyes introduction to renewable energy resources in this video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : Solar energy is energy provided by sunlight .
Solar cells can turn sunlight into electricity .
The energy in sunlight is virtually limitless and free and creates no pollution to use .
Wind energy is energy provided by the blowing wind .
Wind turbines , like those in Figure 25.11 , can turn wind energy into electricity .
Everyone can help make a difference .
There are three basic ways that all of us can conserve natural resources .
They are referred to as the three Rs : reduce , reuse , and recycle .
Reducing the amount of natural resources you use is the best way to conserve resources .
It takes energy to make new items , and even reusing or recycling items takes energy .
Also , turn off appliances and lights when you arent using them .
Both steps will reduce the amount of energy resources you use .
Keep the thermostat set low in the winter and high in the summer -LRB- see Figure 25.12 -RRB- .
Instead of turning up the heat in cold weather , put on an extra layer of clothes to save energy resources .
Open windows and use fans in hot weather rather than turning on the air conditioning .
Often , this involves just being less wasteful .
Follow these tips to reduce your use of natural resources : Walk , bike , or use public transit instead of driving .
If you must drive , a fuel-efficient vehicle will reduce energy use .
Plan ahead to avoid making extra trips .
For example , dont buy more fresh food than you can use without it going to waste .
Reusing means to use an item again rather than throwing it away and replacing it .
Items can be reused for the same purpose or for a different purpose .
Instead of getting new plastic or paper bags for your purchases each time you shop , take your own reusable bag to the store each time .
Even little steps can add up and help save natural resources .
For example , unwrap gifts carefully and youll be able to reuse the gift wrap on a package for someone else .
You can also reuse writing paper that has only been used on one side .
Generally , it takes less energy to reuse an item than to recycle it , so choose this option over recycling when you can .
Here are some specific tips for reusing natural resources : Consider mending or repairing worn or broken items rather than throwing them out and replacing them .
Youll save money as well as natural resources .
If an item can no longer be used or reused , try to recycle it .
Recycling means taking a used item , breaking it down , and reusing the components .
Encourage your family to recycle if they dont already .
If not , raise the issue with your teacher or principal .
You can also write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper encouraging everyone in your community to recycle .
Recycling also keeps waste out of landfills .
You can learn how some of these materials are recycled by watching this video : .
The recycled compost gradually breaks down to form rich humus that can be added to lawns and gardens to improve the soil .
Chemical energy that organisms need comes from food .
In your body , glucose is the form of energy that is carried in your blood and taken up by each of your trillions of cells .
The process in which glucose is made using energy in light is photosynthesis .
This process requires carbon dioxide and water .
Photosynthesis consists of many chemical reactions .
C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 In words , this means that six molecules of carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- combine with six molecules of water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- in the presence of light energy .
This produces one molecule of glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- and six molecules of oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- .
Use this interactive animation to learn more about photosynthesis : Click on this link for a song about photosynthesis to reinforce the basic ideas : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Types of organisms that make glucose by photosynthesis are pictured in Figure 4.7 .
Living things that make glucose are called autotrophs -LRB- `` self feeders '' -RRB- .
All other living things obtain glucose by eating autotrophs -LRB- or organisms that eat autotrophs -RRB- .
These living things are called heterotrophs -LRB- `` other feeders '' -RRB- .
It contains the green pigment known as chlorophyll .
The structure of a chloroplast is shown in Figure 4.9 .
The chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes .
Inside the chloroplast are stacks of flattened sacs of membrane , called thylakoids .
The thylakoids contain chlorophyll .
Surrounding the thylakoids is a space called the stroma .
The stroma is filled with watery -LRB- `` aqueous '' -RRB- fluid .
Therefore , all the raw materials needed for photosynthesis must be present in the leaves .
The shape of the leaves gives them a lot of surface area to absorb light for photosynthesis .
Roots take up water from the soil .
Stems carry the water from the roots to the leaves .
Carbon dioxide enters the leaves through tiny openings called stomata .
Both stages are described below .
The light reactions occur in the first stage of photosynthesis .
This stage takes place in the thylakoid membranes of the chloroplast .
In the light reactions , energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll .
This energy is temporarily transferred to two molecules : ATP and NADPH .
These molecules are used to store the energy for the second stage of photosynthesis .
The light reactions use water and produce oxygen .
The Calvin cycle occurs in the second stage of photosynthesis .
This stage takes place in the stroma of the chloroplast .
In the Calvin cycle , carbon dioxide is used to produce glucose -LRB- sugar -RRB- using the energy stored in ATP and NADPH .
The energy is released from these molecules when ATP loses phosphate -LRB- Pi -RRB- to become ADP and NADPH loses hydrogen -LRB- H -RRB- to become NADP + .
Cellular respiration is the process in which cells break down glucose , release the stored energy , and use the energy to make ATP .
For each glucose molecule that undergoes this process , up to 38 molecules of ATP are produced .
Each ATP molecules forms when a phosphate is added to ADP , or adenosine diphosphate .
This requires energy , which is stored in the ATP molecule .
When cells need energy , a phosphate can be removed from ATP .
This releases the energy and forms ADP again .
Cellular respiration involves many biochemical reactions .
However , the overall process can be summed up in a single chemical equation : C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 !
6CO2 + 6H2 O + energy -LRB- stored in ATP -RRB- Cellular respiration uses oxygen in addition to glucose .
The energy is used to form dozens of molecules of ATP .
Cellular respiration takes place in the cells of all organisms .
Cellular respiration begins in the cytoplasm of cells .
Figure 4.12 shows the parts of the mitochondrion involved in cellular respiration .
Cellular respiration occurs in three stages .
The flow chart in Figure dont purge me shows the order in which the stages occur and how much ATP forms in each stage .
Each stage is described below .
The world glycolysis means `` glucose splitting '' .
Thats exactly what happens in this stage .
Enzymes split a molecule of glucose into two smaller molecules called pyruvate .
This results in a net gain of two molecules of ATP .
-LRB- Their energy will be used in stage 3 to make more ATP . -RRB-
Glycolysis does not require oxygen .
Anything that doesnt need oxygen is described as anaerobic .
The pyruvate molecules from glycolysis next enter the matrix of a mitochondrion .
This stage is called the Krebs cycle .
During this stage , two more molecules of ATP are produced .
Other energy-storing molecules are also produced -LRB- to be used to make more ATP in stage 3 -RRB- .
The Krebs cycle requires oxygen .
Anything that needs oxygen is described as aerobic .
The oxygen combines with the carbon from the pyruvate molecules .
This forms carbon dioxide , a waste product .
The third and final stage of cellular respiration is called electron transport .
Their energy is used in this stage to make many more molecules of ATP .
In fact , during this stage , as many as 34 molecules of ATP are produced .
Electron transport requires oxygen , so this stage is also aerobic .
The oxygen combines with hydrogen from the energy-storing molecules .
This forms water , another waste product .
Some organisms can produce ATP from glucose anaerobically .
One way this happens is called fermentation .
Fermentation includes the glycolysis step of cellular respiration .
In lactic acid fermentation , glycolysis is followed by a step that produces lactic acid .
This step forms additional molecules of ATP .
Lactic acid fermentation occurs in some bacteria , including the bacteria in yogurt .
The lactic acid gives unsweetened yogurt its sour taste .
Your own muscle cells can also undertake lactic acid fermentation .
This occurs when the cells are working very hard .
The muscle cells of the hurdlers in Figure 4.15 are using lactic acid fermentation by the time the athletes reach finish line .
In alcoholic fermentation , glycolysis is followed by a step that produces alcohol and carbon dioxide .
This step also forms additional molecules of ATP .
Carbon dioxide from alcoholic fermentation creates gas bubbles in bread dough .
The bubbles leave little holes in the bread after it bakes .
The holes make the bread light and fluffy .
Aerobic respiration releases far more energy than anaerobic respiration does .
It also allows organisms to live in places where there is little or no oxygen , such as deep under water or soil .
For an entertaining review of aerobic and anaerobic respiration , watch this creative music video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
RNA is needed for this task .
RNA helps build proteins .
Proteins , in turn , determine the structure and function of all your cells .
Proteins consist of chains of amino acids .
A proteins structure and function depends on the sequence of its amino acids .
Instructions for this sequence are encoded in DNA .
In eukaryotic cells , chromosomes are contained within the nucleus .
But proteins are made in the cytoplasm at structures called ribosomes .
How do the instructions in DNA reach the ribosomes in the cytoplasm ?
It can squeeze through pores in the membrane that encloses the nucleus .
All three types are needed to make proteins .
Ribosomal RNA -LRB- rRNA -RRB- helps form a ribosome .
The amino acids are then joined together to make the protein .
How is the information for making proteins encoded in DNA ?
Find the codon AUG in Figure 5.17 .
After an AUG start codon , the next three letters are read as the second codon .
The next three letters after that are read as the third codon , and so on .
You can see how this works in Figure 5.18 .
The figure shows the bases in a molecule
The genetic code is based on the sequence of nitrogen bases in DNA .
The four bases make up the letters of the code .
Groups of three bases each make up code words .
These three-letter code words are called codons .
Each codon stands for one amino acid or else for a start or stop signal .
There are 20 amino acids that make up proteins .
This shows that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor .
This is necessary so the correct amino acid is always selected .
Most amino acids are encoded by more than one codon .
It reduces the risk of the wrong amino acid being selected if there is a mistake in the code .
The process in which proteins are made is called protein synthesis .
Watch this video for a good introduction to both steps of protein synthesis : http : / / w MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Using this strand of DNA as a template , nucleotides are joined together to make a complementary strand of mRNA .
The mRNA contains bases that are complementary to the bases in the DNA strand .
Translation takes place at a ribosome in the cytoplasm .
During translation , the genetic code in mRNA is read to make a protein .
During transcription , a strand of DNA is copied to make a strand of mRNA .
The molecule of mRNA leaves the nucleus and moves to a ribosome .
The ribosome consists of rRNA and proteins .
Molecules of tRNA bring amino acids to the ribosome in the correct sequence .
At the ribosome , the amino acids are joined together to form a chain of amino acids .
The chain of amino acids keeps growing until a stop codon is reached .
It occurs by the following steps , as shown in Figure 5.19 .
An enzyme binds to the DNA .
After the DNA unwinds , the enzyme can read the bases in one of the DNA strands .
Some mutations occur when a mistake is made during DNA replication or transcription .
Other mutations occur because of environmental factors .
Anything in the environment that causes a mutation is known as a mutagen .
Examples of mutagens are shown in Figure 5.21 .
Many mutations have no effect on the proteins they encode .
These mutations are considered neutral .
Some harmful mutations cause cancer or other genetic disorders .
Mutations also vary in their effects depending on whether they occur in gametes or in other cells of the body .
Mutations that occur in gametes can be passed on to offspring .
An offspring that inherits a mutation in a gamete will have the mutation in all of its cells .
Mutations that occur in body cells can not be passed on to offspring .
Or the protein might help the organism adapt to a new environment .
These mutations are considered beneficial .
An example is a mutation that helps bacteria resist antibiotics .
Bacteria with the mutation increase in numbers , so the mutation becomes more common .
Harmful mutations often result in a protein that no longer can do its job .
The effect of a mutation is likely to depend as well on the type of mutation that occurs .
A mutation that changes all or a large part of a chromosome is called a chromosomal mutation .
Take the sentence The big dog ate the red cat .
If the second letter of big is deleted , then the sentence becomes : The bgd oga tet her edc at .
Deleting a single letter makes the rest of the sentence impossible to read .
Some mutations change just one or a few bases in DNA .
A change in just one base is called a point mutation .
Table 5.1 compares different types of point mutations and their effects .
Sometimes chromosomes are missing or extra copies are present .
An example is the mutation that causes Down syndrome .
Deleting or inserting a nitrogen base causes a frameshift mutation .
All of the codons following the mutation are misread .
Darwins theory of evolution by natural selection contains two major ideas : One idea is that evolution happens .
Living things have changed as descendants diverged from common ancestors in the past .
The other idea is that evolution occurs by natural selection .
Natural selection is the process in which living things with beneficial traits produce more offspring .
As a result , their traits increase in the population over time .
How did Darwin come up with the theory of evolution by natural selection ?
Darwin loved nature , so the job was ideal for him .
Some of his most important observations were made on the Galpagos Islands .
The 16 Galpagos Islands lie 966 kilometers -LRB- about 600 miles -RRB- off the west coast of South America .
Some of the animals Darwin observed on the islands were giant tortoises and birds called finches .
Watch this video for an excellent introduction to Darwin , his voyage , and the Galpagos :
Darwin was only 22 years old when the ship set sail .
The trip lasted for almost five years and circled the globe .
Figure 7.2 shows the route the ship took .
Imagine setting out for such an incredible adventure at age 22 , and youll understand why the trip had such a big influence on Darwin .
Darwins job on the voyage was to observe and collect specimens whenever the ship went ashore .
These gentle giants are found almost nowhere else in the world .
The saddle shape of their shells allowed tortoises on those islands to reach up and graze on vegetation high above them .
Darwin was amazed by their huge size .
The local people even could tell which island a tortoise came from based on the shape of its shell .
Darwin wondered how each island came to have its own type of tortoise .
He found out that tortoises with dome - shaped shells lived on islands where the plants they ate were abundant and easy to reach .
Tortoises with saddle - shaped shells , in contrast , lived on islands that were drier .
You can see four examples in Figure 7.4 .
Darwin investigated further .
He found that the different beaks seemed to suit the birds for the food available on their island .
For example , finch number 1 in Figure 7.4 used its large , strong beak to crack open and eat big , tough seeds .
This seemed reasonable , but how had it come about ?
Besides his observations on the Beagle , other influences helped Darwin develop his theory of evolution by natural selection .
These included his knowledge of plant and animal breeding and the ideas of other scientists .
Darwin knew that people could breed plants and animals to have useful traits .
By selecting which individuals were allowed to reproduce , they could change an organisms traits over several generations .
Darwin called this type of change in organisms artificial selection .
Keeping and breeding pigeons was a popular hobby in Darwins day .
Both types of pigeons in the bottom row were bred from the common rock pigeon at the top of the figure .
There were three other scientists in particular that influenced Darwin .
He wrote a famous book called Principles of Geology .
Darwin took the book with him on the Beagle .
Lyell argued that geological processes such as erosion change Earths surface very gradually .
To account for all the changes that had occurred on the planet , Earth must be a lot older than most people believed .
He wrote a popular essay called On Population .
He argued that human populations have the potential to grow faster than the resources they need .
When populations get too big , disease and famine occur .
These calamities control population size by killing off the weakest people .
He was one of the first scientists to propose that species change over time .
Lamarck also tried to explain how it happens , but he got that part wrong .
Lamarck thought that the traits an organism developed during its life time could be passed on to its offspring .
Darwin spent many years thinking about his own observations and the writings of Lamarck , Lyell , and Malthus .
Heres how Darwin thought through his theory : Like Lamarck , Darwin assumed that species evolve , or change their traits over time .
Fossils Darwin found on his voyage helped convince him that evolution occurs .
These traits become more common over many generations .
In nature , Darwin reasoned , individuals with certain traits might be more likely to survive the struggle for existence and have offspring .
Their traits would become more common over time .
In this case , nature selects the traits that are beneficial .
Thats why Darwin called this process natural selection .
Darwin used the word fitness to refer to the ability to reproduce and pass traits to the next generation
From Lyell , Darwin realized that Earth is very old .
This meant that living things had a long time in which to evolve .
There was enough time to produce the great diversity of living things that Darwin had observed .
From Malthus , Darwin saw that populations could grow faster than their resources .
This overproduction of offspring led to a struggle for existence , in Darwins words .
In this struggle , only the fittest survive .
From Darwins knowledge of artificial selection , he knew how traits can change over time .
Breeders artificially select the traits that they find beneficial .
Darwin finally published his theory of evolution by natural selection in 1859 .
The book is very detailed and includes a lot of evidence for the theory .
Darwins book changed science forever .
The theory of evolution by natural selection became the unifying theory of all life science .
Fossils are the preserved remains or traces of organisms that lived during earlier ages .
Remains that become fossils are generally the hard parts of organismsmainly bones , teeth , or shells .
Traces include any evidence of life , such as footprints like the dinosaur footprint in Figure 7.7 .
A scientist who studies fossils to learn about the evolution of living things is called a paleontologist .
The soft parts of organisms almost always decompose quickly after death .
Thats why most fossils consist of hard parts such as bones .
The wasp lived about 20 million years ago , but even its fragile wings have been preserved by the amber .
Its rare even for hard parts to remain intact long enough to become fossils .
Fossils form when water seeps through the remains and deposits minerals in them .
Remains are more likely to form fossils if they are covered quickly by sediments .
Once in a while , remains are preserved almost unchanged .
Or they may be trapped in tree resin that hardens to form amber .
Thats what happened to the wasp in Figure 7.8 .
Scientists need to determine when the organisms lived who left behind the fossils .
Fossils can be dated in two different ways : absolute dating and relative dating .
Absolute dating determines about how long ago a fossil organism lived .
This gives the fossil an approximate age in years .
Absolute dating is often based on the amount of carbon-14 or other radioactive element that remains in a fossil .
Relative dating is based on the positions of fossils in rock layers .
Lower rock layers were laid down earlier , so they are assumed to contain older fossils .
This is illustrated in Figure 7.9 .
Scientists have long known that mammals first evolved on land about 200 million years ago .
In Figure 7.10 you can see an artists rendition of such a whale ancestor .
Watch this short video to learn more about the amazing story of whale evolution based on the fossils :
Whales are mammals that live completely in the water .
Or did they evolve from animals that already lived in the water ?
Starting in the late 1970s , a growing number of fossils have allowed scientists to piece together the story of whale evolution .
The fossils represent ancient , whale-like animals .
Scientists have learned a lot about evolution by comparing living organisms .
They have compared body parts , embryos , and molecules such as DNA and proteins .
Comparing body parts of different species may reveal evidence for evolution .
For example , all mammals have front limbs that look quite different and are used for different purposes .
Bats use their front limbs to fly , whales use them to swim , and cats use them to run and climb .
The similar bones provide evidence that all four animals evolved from a common ancestor .
Some of the most interesting evidence for evolution comes from vestigial structures .
These are body parts that are no longer used but are still present in modern organisms .
Examples in humans include tail bones and the appendix .
If your appendix becomes infected , a surgeon can remove it .
Embryos of different species may look quite similar , even when the adult forms look very different .
The embryos look so similar that its hard to tell them apart .
Such similarities provide evidence that all four types of animals are related .
Scientists can compare the DNA or proteins of different species .
If the molecules are similar , this shows that the species are related .
When molecules are used in this way , they are called molecular clocks .
This method assumes that random mutations occur at a constant rate for a given protein or segment of DNA .
Over time , the mutations add up .
Table 7.1 compares the DNA of four different organisms with modern human DNA .
This shows that chimpanzees are very closely related to us .
The best evidence for evolution comes from actually observing changes in organisms through time .
In the 1970s , biologists Peter and Rosemary Grant went to the Galpagos Islands to do fieldwork .
Many of the small-beaked birds died in the drought .
Within just a couple of years , the average beak size in the finches increased .
The drought resulted in fewer seeds for the finches to eat .
Birds with smaller beaks could eat only the smaller seeds .
Variation in traits is controlled by different alleles for genes .
Beak size in finch populations changed in just two years because of a serious drought .
Evolution that occurs over a long period of time is called macroevolution .
This scale of evolution occurs above the level of the species .
Fossils provide evidence for evolution at this scale .
The evolution of the horse family , shown in Figure 7.13 , is an example of macroevolution .
Evolution occurs because of changes in alleles over time .
That depends on the time scale of evolution you consider .
Evolution that occurs over a short period of time is known as microevolution .
This scale of evolution occurs at the level of the population .
A population is a group of organisms of the same species that live in the same area .
Genotype AA Aa aa Totals Number of Individuals 50 40 10 100 Number of A Alleles 100 -LRB- 50 x 2 -RRB- 40 -LRB- 40 x 1 -RRB- 0 -LRB- 10 x 0 -RRB- 140 Number of a Alleles 0 -LRB- 50 x 0 -RRB- 40 -LRB- 40 x 1 -RRB- 20 -LRB- 10 x 2 -RRB- 60 Evolution occurs in a population when its allele frequencies change over time .
For each gene , the gene pool includes all the different alleles in the population .
What causes allele frequencies to change ?
The gene pool can be described by its allele frequencies for specific genes .
The frequency of an allele is the number of copies of that allele divided by the total number of alleles for the gene in the gene pool .
A simple example will help you understand these concepts .
The data in Table 7.2 represent a population of 100 individuals .
The gene in question exists as two different alleles , A and a.
There are four major forces of evolution that cause allele frequencies to change .
Allele frequencies in the offspring may differ by chance from those in the parents .
This is like tossing a coin just a few times .
In the same way , you may get more or less than the expected allele frequencies in the small number of individuals in the next generation .
Natural selection is a change in allele frequencies that occurs because some genotypes are more fit than others .
Genotypes with greater fitness produce more offspring and pass more copies of their alleles to the next generation .
This is the force of evolution that Darwin identified .
Figure 23.12 shows how Darwin thought natural selection led to variation in finches on the Galpagos Islands .
Mutation creates new genetic variation in a gene pool This is how all new alleles first arise .
Gene flow is the movement of genes into or out of a gene pool It occurs when individuals migrate into or out of the population .
How much gene flow changes allele frequencies depends on how many migrants there are and their genotypes .
The evolution of a new species is called speciation .
A species is a group of organisms that can mate and produce fertile offspring together but not with members of other such groups .
Scientists think that a single species of lizard first colonized one of the islands about 50 million years ago .
A few lizards from this original species eventually reached each of the other islands , where they evolved in isolation .
Anoles in different habitats evolved traits that affected mating .
Eventually , all the different species of anoles known today evolved .
Watch this interesting video to learn more about anole speciation in the Caribbean :
Some members of an existing species must change so they can no produce fertile offspring with the rest of the species .
Speciation often occurs when some members of a species break off from the rest .
The splinter group evolves in isolation from the original species .
The original species also continues to evolve .
Sooner or later , the splinter group becomes too different to breed with members of the original species .
At that point , a new species has formed .
A good example of speciation involves anole lizards , like the one pictured in Figure 7.15 .
Sometimes two species evolve the same traits .
This is called convergent evolution .
Caribbean Anoles demonstrate this as well .
On each Caribbean island , anoles in similar habitats evolved the same traits .
For example , anoles that lived on the forest floor evolved long legs for leaping and running on the ground .
Anoles that lived on tree branches evolved short legs that helped them cling to small branches and twigs .
Anoles that lived at the tops of trees evolved large toe pads that allowed them to walk on leaves without falling .
On each of the islands , there were anole species that evolved in each of these same ways .
Two species may often interact with each other and have a close relationship .
Examples include flowers and the animals that pollinate them .
When one of the two species evolves new traits , the other species may evolve matching traits .
This is called coevolution .
The very long beak of this hummingbird co-evolved with the tubular flowers it pollinates .
Only this species of hummingbird can reach nectar deep in the flowers .
Darwin thought that evolution occurs very slowly .
Today , Earths climate is changing rapidly .
How do you think this might affect the rate of evolution ?
But what if conditions are changing rapidly ?
Evolution is likely to occur more rapidly as well .
For example , the Grants showed that evolution occurred in just a couple of years in Darwins finches .
This happened when a severe drought killed off a lot of the plants that the birds needed for food .
Millions of fossils have been found since Darwins time .
They show that evolution may occur in fits and starts .
Long period of little or gradual change may be interrupted by bursts of rapid change .
The rate of evolution is influenced by how the environment is changing .
It may help to think of Earths history as a 24-hour day .
Figure 7.17 shows the history of Earth in a day .
The first prokaryotes evolve around 3:00 am .
Animals dont evolve until almost 8:00 pm .
Humans appear only in the last minute of the day .
Relating these major events in Earths history to a 24-hour day helps to put them in perspective .
You can see this time scale in Figure 7.18 .
These divisions are based on major changes in geology , climate , and the evolution of life .
The geologic time scale organizes Earths history on the basis of important events instead of time alone .
To see how life evolved during the Precambrian and beyond , watch this wonderful video .
Rivers of melted rock flowed over its surface .
Gradually , the planet cooled and formed a solid crust .
Gases from volcanoes formed an atmosphere , although it contained only a trace of oxygen .
As the planet continued to cool , clouds formed and rain fell .
Rainwater helped form oceans .
The ancient atmosphere and oceans would be toxic to modern life , but they set the stage for life to begin .
All living things consist of organic molecules .
Many scientists think that organic molecules evolved before cells , perhaps as early as 4 billion years ago .
The earliest cells may have consisted of little more than RNA inside a lipid membrane .
The first cells probably evolved between 3.8 and 4 billion years ago .
Scientists think that one cell , called the Last Universal Common Ancestor -LRB- LUCA -RRB- , gave rise to all of the following life on Earth .
LUCA may have existed around 3.5 billion years ago .
Its possible that lightning sparked chemical reactions in Earths early atmosphere .
This could have created a soup of organic molecules from inorganic chemicals .
Some scientists think that RNA was the first organic molecule to evolve .
Some RNA molecules can carry out chemical reactions .
All living things are made of one or more cells .
Scientists speculate that lipid membranes grew around RNA molecules .
They had evolved in its absence .
The few that survived evolved a new way to use oxygen .
The first eukaryotic cells probably evolved about 2 billion years ago .
Thats when cells evolved organelles and a nucleus .
Figure 7.20 shows one theory about the origin of organelles .
According to this theory , a large cell engulfed small cells .
The small cells took on special roles that helped the large cell function .
In return , the small cells got nutrients from the large cell .
Eventually , the large and small cells could no longer live apart .
Eukaryotes would go on to evolve sexual reproduction .
The first multicellular organisms evolved about 1 billion years ago .
Gradually , these and other traits evolved .
Photosynthesis evolved about 3 billion years ago .
After that , certain cells could use sunlight to make food .
At the end of the Precambrian , a mass extinction occurred .
In a mass extinction , the majority of species die out .
The Precambrian mass extinction was the first of six mass extinctions that occurred on Earth .
The Paleozoic Era lasted from 544 to 245 million years ago .
The Precambrian mass extinction opened up many niches for new organisms to fill .
As a result , the Cambrian Period began with an explosion of new kinds of living things .
For example , many types of simple animals called sponges evolved .
During the Ordovician Period , the oceans became filled with many kinds of invertebrates .
Plants colonized the land for the first time .
However , animals remained in the water .
Corals appeared in the oceans during the Silurian period .
Fish continued to evolve .
On land , vascular plants appeared .
These are plants that have special tissues to circulate water and other substances .
This allowed plants to become larger and colonize drier habitats .
During the Devonian Period , the first seed plants evolved .
Seeds have a protective coat and contain stored food .
Seed plants eventually became the most common type of plants on land .
In the oceans , fish with lobe fins evolved .
These fish could breathe air when they raised their head above water .
This was a step in the evolution of animals that could live on land .
After the ferns and trees died , their remains eventually turned to coal .
The first amphibians also evolved during this period .
They could live on land but had to return to the water to lay their eggs .
After amphibians , the earliest reptiles appeared .
During the Permian Period , all the major landmasses moved together to form one supercontinent .
The supercontinent has been named Pangaea .
One possible reason is that a very large meteorite struck Earth .
Either event could create a huge amount of dust .
The dust might block out sunlight for months .
This would cool the planet and prevent photosynthesis .
You can see how it looked in Figure 7.23 .
At this time , temperatures were extreme and the climate became very dry .
As a result , plants and animals evolved ways to cope with dryness .
This helped prevent water loss .
Plants evolved waxy leaves for the same purpose .
The Permian Period ended with Earths second mass extinction .
During this event , most of Earths species went extinct .
The Permian mass extinction paved the way for another burst of new life at the start of the Mesozoic Era .
This era is known as the age of dinosaurs .
During the Triassic Period , the first dinosaurs evolved from reptile ancestors .
Modern corals , fish , and insects all evolved in this period as well .
The supercontinent of Pangea started to break up .
The Triassic Period ended in a mass extinction .
The Triassic mass extinction gave dinosaurs the opportunity to really flourish during the Jurassic Period .
Thats why this period is called the golden age of dinosaurs .
The earliest birds also evolved during the Jurassic from dinosaur ancestors .
Flowering plants also appeared for the first time .
New insects evolved to pollinate them .
The continents continued to move apart .
During the Cretaceous Period , the dinosaurs reached their maximum size and distribution .
For example , the well - known Tyrannosaurus rex weighed at least 7 tons !
Other factors probably contributed to the mass extinction as well .
-LRB- Notice how small the person looks in the bottom left of the photo . -RRB-
The period ended with another mass extinction .
This time , the dinosaurs went extinct .
Some scientists think that a comet or asteroid may have crashed into Earth .
This could darken the sky , shut down photosynthesis , and cause climate change .
The extinction of the dinosaurs at the end of the Mesozoic Era paved the way for mammals to take over .
Thats why the Cenozoic Era is called the age of mammals .
The Cenozoic is divided into two periods .
During the Tertiary Period , many new kinds of mammals evolved .
For example , primates and human ancestors first appeared during this period .
Many mammals also increased in size .
Flowering plants and insects increased in numbers .
During the Quaternary Period , the climate cooled .
This caused a series of ice ages .
Those that couldnt adapt or move went extinct , along with many plants .
The last ice age ended about 12,000 years ago .
By then , our own species , Homo sapiens , had evolved .
Glaciers advanced southward from the North Pole .
Sea levels fell because so much water was frozen in glaciers .
The land bridges allowed land animals to move to new areas .
Some mammals adapted to the cold by evolving very large size and thick fur .
An example is the woolly mammoth , shown in Figure 7.25 .
Other mammals moved closer to the equator .
Any surface that has not been sterilized is likely to be covered with bacteria .
Many more are thought to exist .
The known species are classified on the basis of various traits .
They may also be classified by how they react to a dye called Gram stain .
Bacteria come in several different shapes .
The different shapes can be seen by examining bacteria under a light microscope .
There are three types of bacteria based on shape : bacilli -LRB- bacillus , singular -RRB- , or rod shaped .
cocci -LRB- coccus , singular -RRB- , or sphere shaped .
Different types of bacteria stain a different color when Gram stain is applied to them .
The two types differ in their outer layers .
This explains why they stain differently .
Bacteria that stain purple are called gram-positive bacteria .
Bacteria that stain red are called gram-negative bacteria .
Bacteria make our lives easier in a variety of ways .
For a dramatic overview of the many roles of bacteria , watch this stunning video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Bacteria help usand all other living thingsby decomposing wastes .
In this way , they recycle carbon and nitrogen in ecosystems .
Do you eat any of the fermented foods pictured in Figure 8.12 ?
If so , you are eating bacteria and their wastes .
On ancient Earth , they added oxygen to the atmosphere and changed the course of evolution forever .
Ticks carry Lyme disease bacteria from deer to people when they bite them .
However , some of them can cause disease .
Any organism that causes disease is called a pathogen .
Diseases caused by bacterial pathogens include food poisoning , strep throat , and Lyme disease .
Bacteria that cause disease may spread directly from person to person .
For example , they may spread when people shake hands with , or sneeze on , other people .
Bacteria may also spread through food , water , or objects that have become contaminated with them .
Some bacteria are spread by vectors .
A vector is an organism that spreads bacteria or other pathogens .
Bacteria in food or water usually can be killed by heating it to a high temperature .
Bacteria on surfaces such as countertops and floors can be killed with disinfectants , such as chlorine bleach .
Bacterial infections in people can be treated with antibiotic drugs .
These drugs kill bacteria and may quickly cure the disease .
If youve ever had strep throat , you were probably prescribed an antibiotic to treat it .
Some bacteria have developed antibiotic resistance .
They have evolved traits that make them resistant to one or more antibiotic drugs .
When is a person considered an adult ?
Most teens become physically mature by the age of 16 or so .
Once adulthood begins , it can be divided into three stages : -LRB- 1 -RRB- early , -LRB- 2 -RRB- middle , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- late adulthood .
Early adulthood starts at age 18 or 21 .
This is the stage of life when most people complete their education .
Many people also marry and start a family during early adulthood .
Middle adulthood begins in the mid-30s .
During middle adulthood , people start to show signs of aging .
Their hair slowly turns gray .
The risk of health problems also increases during middle adulthood .
For example , heart disease , cancer , and diabetes become more common during this time .
Their children also grow up and may leave home during this stage .
Late adulthood begins in the mid-60s .
In arthritis , joints wear out and become stiff and painful .
As many as one in four late adults may develop Alzheimers disease .
In this disease , brain changes cause mental abilities to decrease .
This family picture shows females in each of the three stages of life .
Despite problems such as these , many people remain healthy and active into their 80s or even 90s .
Then adopt a healthy lifestyle now and follow it for life .
Doing so will increase your chances of staying healthy and active to an old age .
Exercising the body and brain help prevent the physical and mental effects of aging .
The risk of developing diseases such as heart disease and cancer continues to rise .
Recall that terrestrial biomes are defined by their climate .
Thats because plants and animals are adapted for certain amounts of temperature and moisture .
However , would aquatic biomes be classified in the same way ?
No , that wouldnt make much senseall parts of an aquatic environment have plenty of water .
Most aquatic organisms do not have to deal with extremes of temperature or moisture .
Instead , their main limiting factors are the availability of sunlight and the concentration of dissolved oxygen and nutrients in the water .
Aquatic biomes in the ocean are called marine biomes .
Organisms that live in marine biomes must be adapted to the salt in the water .
Corals also extend tentacles to obtain plankton from the water .
Coral reefs include several species of microorganisms , invertebrates , fishes , sea urchins , octopuses , and sea stars .
Estuaries are areas where freshwater streams or rivers merge with the ocean .
Marine biomes include the oceans , coral reefs , and estuaries -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Ocean zones are also divided based on their depth and their distance from land .
Corals consist partially of algae , which provide nutrients via photosynthesis .
Freshwater biomes are defined by their low salt concentration , usually less than 1 % .
Plants and animals in freshwater regions are adjusted to the low salt content and would not be able to survive in areas of high salt concentration , such as the ocean .
Ponds and lakes range in size from just a few square meters to thousands of square kilometers .
Streams and rivers are bodies of flowing water moving in one direction .
Wetlands are areas of standing water that support aquatic plants .
Wetlands include marshes , swamps , and bogs .
In large bodies of water , such as the ocean and lakes , the water can be divided into zones based on the amount of sunlight it receives : 1 .
The photic zone extends to a maximum depth of 200 meters -LRB- 656 feet -RRB- below the surface of the water .
Algae and other photosynthetic organisms can make food and support food webs .
This is where too little sunlight penetrates for photosyn - thesis to occur .
As a result , producers must make `` food '' by chemosynthesis , or the food must drift down from the water above .
Water in lakes and the ocean also varies in the amount of dissolved oxygen and nutrients it contains : 1 .
Water near the surface of lakes and the ocean usually has more dissolved oxygen than does deeper water .
Decomposers near the bottom of the water break down the dead organisms and release their nutrients back into the water .
This is because surface water absorbs oxygen from the air above it .
Water near shore generally has more dissolved nutrients than water farther from shore .
This is because most nutrients enter the water from land .
Water near the bottom of lakes and the ocean may contain more nutrients than water closer to the surface .
When aquatic organisms die , they sink to the bottom .
The immune system usually protects you from pathogens and other causes of disease .
When the immune system is working properly , it keeps you from getting sick .
AIDS is an infectious disease of the immune system caused by a virus .
Does it make sense for an immune system to attack the cells it is meant to protect ?
No , but an immune system that does not function properly will attack its own cells .
But they can be helped with medicines that weaken the immune systems attack on normal cells .
Other autoimmune diseases include celiac disease -LRB- damages to the small intestine -RRB- , inflam - matory bowel disease -LRB- damage to the digestive tract -RRB- , psoriasis -LRB- damage to the skin -RRB- , and lupus -LRB- damage to the joints , skin , kidneys , heart , and lungs -RRB- .
This causes weakness and pain .
In rheumatoid arthritis , the immune system attacks the cells of joints .
An allergy occurs when the immune system attacks a harmless substance that enters the body from the outside .
A substance that causes an allergy is called an allergen .
Ragweed is a common roadside weed found throughout the United States .
Other common causes of allergies include : Drugs , such as penicillin .
The dead skin cells of dogs and cats , called dander .
Most allergies can be treated with medicines .
It is the immune system , not the allergen , that causes the symptoms of an allergy .
Medicines used to treat allergies include antihistamines and corticos - teroids .
These medicines help control the immune system when it attacks an allergen .
Sometimes , allergies cause severe symptoms , a condition known as anaphylaxis .
Skin contact with poison ivy leads to an itchy rash in people who are allergic to the plant .
Most of the nutritional value of plant material would be wasted without these bacteria .
A wide range of friendly bacteria live in the gut .
Bacteria begin to populate the human digestive system right after birth .
Gut bacteria include Lactobacillus , the bacteria commonly used in probiotic foods such as yogurt , and E. coli bacteria .
It is estimated that 100 trillion bacteria live in the gut .
This is more than the human cells that make up you .
As these bacteria are helpful , your body does not attack them .
The bacteria actually cover themselves with sugar molecules removed from the actual cells of the digestive system .
This disguises the bacteria and protects them from the immune system .
As the bacteria that live in the human gut are beneficial to us , and as the bacteria enjoy a safe environment to live , the relationship that we have with these tiny organisms is described as mutualism , a type of symbiotic relationship .
Together , all the bacteria in your gut may weight just about 2 pounds .
Friendly bacteria live mostly in the large intestine and part of the small intestine .
The acidic environment of the stomach does not allow bacterial growth .
For example , intestinal bacteria : Produce vitamin B12 and vitamin K. Control the growth of harmful bacteria .
Break down poisons in the large intestine .
Bacteria produce enzymes that digest carbohydrates in plant cell walls .
Like all organisms , bacteria need energy , and they can acquire this energy through a number of different ways .
Photosynthetic bacteria use the energy of the sun to make their own food .
In the presence of sunlight , carbon dioxide and water are turned into glucose and oxygen .
The glucose is then turned into usable energy .
An example of photosynthetic bacteria is cyanobacteria , as seen in the opening image .
These bacteria are sometimes called blue-green algae , although they are not algae , due to their numerous chlorophyll molecules .
Bacteria known as decomposers break down wastes and dead organisms into smaller molecules .
These bacteria use the organic substrates they break down to get their energy , carbon , and nutrients they need for survival .
Chemosynthetic bacteria , or chemotrophs , obtain energy by breaking down chemical compounds in their environment .
These bacteria are important because they help cycle nitrogen through the environ - ment for other living things to use .
Nitrogen can not be made by living organisms , so it must be continually recycled .
Organisms need nitrogen to make organic compounds , such as DNA .
Some bacteria depend on other organisms for survival .
For example , some bacteria live in the roots of legumes , such as pea plants -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The bacteria turn nitrogen-containing molecules into nitrogen that the plant can use .
Meanwhile , the root provides nutrients to the bacteria .
In this relationship , both the bacteria and the plant benefit , so it is known as a mutualism .
Other mutualistic bacteria include gut microbes .
These are bacteria that live in the intestines of animals .
They are usually beneficial bacteria , needed by the host organism .
These microbes obviously dont kill their host , as that would kill the bacteria as well .
Other bacteria are parasitic and can cause illness .
Harmful bacteria will be discussed in another concept .
This is a non-specific type of defense , in that it tries to keep all pathogens out .
The first line of defense includes different types of barriers .
The first line also includes tears , mucus , cilia , stomach acid , urine flow , and friendly bacteria .
The outside of a castle was protected by a moat and high walls .
Inside the castle , soldiers were ready to fight off any enemies that made it across the moat and over the walls .
Only pathogens that get through all the defenses can harm you .
The first line of defence includes both physical and chemical barriers that are always ready and prepared to defend the body from infection .
Pathogens must make it past this first line of defense to cause harm .
If this defense is broken , the second line of defense within your body is activated .
Most pathogens get stuck in the mucus before they can do harm to the body .
Cilia in the lungs are pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
They move in waves and sweep mucus and trapped pathogens toward body openings .
The skin has several layers that stack on top of each other -LRB- Figure The mouth and nose are not lined with skin .
Instead , they are lined with mucous membranes .
Other organs that are exposed to the outside world , including the lungs and stomach , are also lined with mucous membranes .
Most body fluids that you release from your body contain chemicals that kill pathogens .
For example , mucus , sweat , tears , and saliva contain enzymes called lysozymes that kill pathogens .
These enzymes can break down the cell walls of bacteria to kill them .
The stomach also releases a very strong acid , called hydrochloric acid .
This acid kills most pathogens that enter the stomach in food or water .
Urine is also acidic , so few pathogens can grow in it .
This is what the cilia lining the lungs look like when they are magnified .
You are not aware of them , but your skin is covered by millions -LRB- or more ! -RRB-
Most of these bacteria help defend your body from pathogens .
They compete with harmful bacteria for food and space .
This prevents the harmful bacteria from multiplying and making you sick .
Maybe you have heard people say that they have type A or type O blood .
The ABO blood group system is important if a person needs a blood transfusion .
A blood transfusion is the process of putting blood or blood products from one person into the circulatory system of another person .
The blood type of the recipient needs to be carefully matched to the blood type of the donor .
Thats because different blood types have different types of antibodies , or proteins , released by the blood cells .
Antibodies attack strange substances in the body .
For example , imagine a person with type O blood was given type A blood .
First , what type of antibodies do people with type O blood produce ?
Blood type is a way to describe the type of antigens , or proteins , on the surface of red blood cells -LRB- RBCs -RRB- .
This means , if a person with type O blood received type A blood , the anti-A antibodies in the persons blood would attack the A antigens on the RBCs in the donor blood -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The antibodies would cause the RBCs to clump together , and the clumps could block a blood vessel .
This clumping of blood cells could cause death .
A person with type O blood has A and B antibodies in his/her plasma ; if the person was to get type A blood instead of type O , his/her A antibodies would attach to the antigens on the RBCs and cause them to clump together .
People with type A blood produce anti-B antibodies , and people with type B blood produce anti-A antibodies .
People with type AB blood do not produce either antibody .
If the person does not have the antigen , they are considered negative .
As a result , type O blood can be given to people with blood types A , B , or AB .
People with type AB blood can receive any ABO blood type .
People with type AB blood are called universal recipients because they can receive any blood type .
The antigens and antibodies that define blood type are listed as follows -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- .
Blood Type Antigen Type Plasma Antibodies A B AB O A B A and B none anti-B anti-A none anti-A , anti-B Can Receive Blood from Types A , O B , O AB , A , B , O O Can Donate Blood to Types A , AB B , AB AB AB , A , B , O
Arteries carry blood away from the heart , while veins return blood to the heart -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The right side of the heart pumps de - oxygenated blood into pulmonary circula - tion , while the left side pumps oxygenated blood into systemic circulation .
The pulmonary arteries carry oxygen - poor blood away from the heart to the lungs .
The pulmonary veins are the only veins that carry oxygen-rich blood .
These are the only arteries that carry oxygen-poor blood .
Capillaries are the smallest type of blood vessel ; they connect very small arteries and veins .
Gases and other substances are exchanged between cells and the blood across the very thin walls of capillaries .
The veins that return oxygen-poor blood to the heart are the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava .
The pulmonary veins return oxygen-rich blood from the lungs to the heart .
Pulmonary circulation is the part of the cardiovascular system that carries oxygen-poor blood away from the heart and brings it to the lungs .
Oxygen-poor blood returns to the heart from the body and leaves the right ventricle through the pulmonary arteries , which carry the blood to each lung .
Once at the lungs , the red blood cells release carbon dioxide and pick up oxygen when you breathe .
The oxygen-rich blood then leaves the lungs through the pulmonary veins , which return it to the left side of the heart .
This completes the pulmonary cycle .
The oxygenated blood is then pumped to the body through systemic circulation , before returning again to pulmonary circulation .
Systemic circulation is the part of the cardiovascular system that carries oxygen-rich blood away from the heart , to the body , and returns oxygen-poor blood back to the heart .
Oxygen-rich blood leaves the left ventricle through the aorta .
The tissues and organs absorb the oxygen through the capillaries .
Oxygen-poor blood is collected from the tissues and organs by tiny veins , which then flow into bigger veins , and , eventually , into the inferior vena cava and superior vena cava .
This completes systemic circulation .
The blood releases carbon dioxide and gets more oxygen in pulmonary circulation before returning to systemic circulation .
There are about 27,000 species of bony fish -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , which are divided into two classes : ray-finned fish and lobe-finned fish .
Most fish are bony fish , making them the largest group of vertebrates in existence today .
A head and pectoral girdles -LRB- arches supporting the forelimbs -RRB- that are covered with bones derived from the skin .
A lung or swim bladder , which helps the body create a balance between sinking and floating by either filling up with or emitting gases such as oxygen .
Controlling the volume of this organ helps fish control their depth .
Jointed , segmented rods supporting the fins .
A cover over the gill called the operculum , which helps them breathe without having to swim .
The ray-finned fish have fin rays , with fins supported by bony spines known as rays .
The ray-finned fish are the dominant class of vertebrates , with nearly 99 % of fish falling into this category .
The lobe-finned fish are characterized by fleshy lobed fins , as opposed to the bony fins of the ray-finned fish .
The pectoral and pelvic fins have joints resembling those of tetrapod -LRB- four-limbed land vertebrates -RRB- limbs .
These fins evolved into legs of amphibians , the first tetrapod land vertebrates .
All lobe-finned fishes possess teeth covered with true enamel .
The lungfish also possess both gills and lungs , solidifying this class as the ancestors of amphibians .
The ocean sunfish is the most massive bony fish in the world , up to 11 feet long and weighing up to 5,070 pounds -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Other very large bony fish include the Atlantic blue marlin , the black marlin , some sturgeon species , the giant grouper , and the goliath grouper .
In contrast , the dwarf pygmy goby measures only 0.6 inches .
In January 2013 , at an auction in Tokyos Tsukiji fish market , a 222-kilogram -LRB- 489-pound -RRB- tuna caught off northeastern Japan sold for 155.4 million yen , which is $ 1,760,000 .
Cancer is a disease that causes cells to divide out of control .
Normally , the body has systems that prevent cells from dividing out of control .
Anything that can cause cancer is called a carcinogen .
But in the case of cancer , these systems fail .
Cancer is usually caused by mutations .
Mutations that lead to cancer usually happen to genes that control the cell cycle .
Because of the mutations , abnormal cells divide uncontrollably .
This often leads to the development of a tumor .
As a tumor grows , it may harm normal tissues around it .
Pathogens that cause cancer include the human papilloma virus -LRB- HPV -RRB- -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- and the hepatitis B virus .
HPV is spread through sexual contact .
The hepatitis B virus is spread through sexual contact or contact with blood containing the virus .
Dozens of chemicals in tobacco smoke , including nicotine , have been shown to cause cancer -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Smoking tobacco increases the risk of cancer of the lung , mouth , throat , and bladder .
Using smokeless tobacco can also cause cancer .
Other chemicals that cause cancer include asbestos , formaldehyde , benzene , cadmium , and nickel .
Forms of radiation that cause cancer include ultraviolet -LRB- UV -RRB- radiation and radon -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Radon is a natural radioactive gas that seeps into buildings from the ground .
Cancer is usually found in adults , especially in adults over the age of 50 .
It happens when the body makes abnormal white blood cells .
Then , the cells may start growing in other tissues .
Prostate cancer makes up about one third of all cancers in men .
Cancer can also be found in children .
If leukemia is treated early , it usually can be cured .
In fact , many cancers can be cured , which is known as remission , if treated early .
Detecting and treating cancer early can often lead to a cure .
Some warning signs of cancer include : Change in bowel or bladder habits .
Treatment of cancer often involves removing a tumor with surgery .
These treatments may include drugs -LRB- known as chemotherapy -RRB- and radiation therapy , which kill cancer cells .
The sooner cancer is treated , the greater the chances of a cure .
Having warning signs does not mean that you have cancer .
Everyone should know the warning signs of cancer .
A cardiovascular disease -LRB- CVD -RRB- is any disease that affects the cardiovascular system .
But the term is usually used to describe diseases that are linked to atherosclerosis .
Blockage of the circulation in the brain can cause a stroke .
Ways to prevent atherosclerosis include eating healthy foods , getting plenty of exercise and not smoking .
A diet high in saturated fat and cholesterol can raise your cholesterol levels , which makes more plaque available to line artery walls and narrow your arteries .
Cholesterol and saturated fats are found mostly in animal products such Atherosclerosis is sometimes referred to as hardening of the arteries ; plaque build - up decreases the blood flow through the artery .
Check food labels to find the amount of saturated fat in a product .
Atherosclerosis -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- is an inflammation of the walls of arteries that causes swelling and a buildup of material called plaque .
Plaque is made of cell pieces , fatty substances , calcium , and connective tissue that builds up around the area of inflammation .
As a plaque grows , it stiffens and narrows the artery , which decreases the flow of blood through the artery .
Atherosclerosis normally begins in late childhood and is typically found in most major arteries .
Atherosclerosis becomes a threat to health when the plaque buildup prevents blood circulation in the heart or the brain .
A blocked blood vessel in the heart can cause a heart attack .
Like any other muscle , your heart needs oxygen .
Hearts have arteries that provide oxygen through the blood .
If cardiac muscle is starved of oxygen for more than roughly five minutes , it will die .
Cardiac muscle cells can not be replaced , so once they die , they are dead forever .
The image below shows the way in which a blocked coronary artery can cause a heart attack and cause part of the heart muscle to die -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Maybe one day stem cells will be used to replace dead cardiac muscle cells .
Occasional chest pain can happen during times of stress or physical activity .
The pain of angina means the heart muscle fibers need more oxygen than they are getting .
A heart attack happens when the blood can not reach the heart because a blood vessel is blocked .
Atherosclerosis in the arteries of the brain can also lead to a stroke .
Risk factors for stroke include old age , high blood pressure , having a previous stroke , diabetes , high cholesterol , and smoking .
The best way to reduce the risk of stroke is to have low blood pressure .
At times the cardiovascular system can work like a pump , a heating system , or even a postal carrier .
Each cell in your body needs oxygen , as oxygen is used in cellular respiration to produce energy in the form of ATP .
Without oxygen , lactic acid fermentation would occur in your cells , which can only be maintained for a brief period of time .
Arteries carry blood full of oxygen -LRB- `` oxygen-rich '' -RRB- away from the heart and veins return oxygen-poor blood back to the heart .
The cardiovascular system also plays a role in maintaining body temperature .
It helps to keep you warm by moving warm blood around your body .
Your blood vessels also control your body temperature to keep you from getting too hot or too cold .
When your brain senses that your body temperature is increasing , it sends messages to the blood vessels in the skin to increase in diameter .
Increasing the diameter of the blood vessels increases the amount of blood and heat that moves near the skins surface .
The heat is then released from the skin .
This helps you cool down .
To do these tasks , your cardiovascular system works with other organ systems , such as the respiratory , endocrine , and nervous systems .
The blood also carries hormones , which are chemical messenger molecules produced by organs of the endocrine system , through your body .
Hormones are produced in one area of your body and have an effect on another area .
An example is the hormone adrenaline , produced by the adrenal glands on top of the kidneys .
Adrenaline has multiple effects on the heart -LRB- it quickens the heart rate -RRB- , on muscles and on the airway .
The cardiovascular system -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- is made up of the heart , the blood vessels , and the blood .
Every cell in your body depends on your cardiovascular system .
Blood receives oxygen in your lungs -LRB- the main organs of the respiratory system -RRB- and then is pumped , by your heart , throughout your body .
The oxygen then diffuses into your cells , and carbon dioxide , a waste product of cellular respiration , moves from your cells into your blood to be delivered back to your lungs and exhaled .
There are many risk factors that can cause a person to develop cardiovascular disease .
A risk factor is anything that is linked to an increased chance of developing a disease .
High blood pressure : If the heart and blood vessels have to work harder than normal , this puts the cardiovas - cular system under a strain .
Lack of physical activity : Aerobic activities , such as the one pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , help keep your heart healthy .
To reduce the risk of disease , you should be active for at least 60 minutes a day , five days a week .
Poor eating habits : Eating mostly foods that do not have many nutrients other than fat or carbohydrate leads to high cholesterol levels , obesity , and cardiovascular disease -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
60 minutes a day of vigorous aerobic activity , such as basketball , is enough to help keep your cardiovascular system healthy .
Risk factors you can not control include : Age : The older a person is , the greater their chance of developing a cardiovascular disease .
Gender : Men under age 64 are much more likely to die of coronary heart disease than women , although the gender difference decreases with age .
Genetics : Family history of cardiovascular disease increases a persons chance of developing heart disease .
Risk factors you can control include many lifestyle factors : Tobacco smoking : Giving up smoking or never starting to smoke is the best way to reduce the risk of heart disease .
Diabetes : Diabetes can cause bodily changes , such as high cholesterol levels , which are are risk factors for cardiovascular disease .
High cholesterol levels : High amounts of `` bad cholesterol , '' increase the risk of cardiovascular disease .
Obesity : Having a very high percentage of body fat , especially if the fat is mostly found in the upper body , rather than the hips and thighs , increases risk significantly .
Cholesterol cant dissolve in the blood .
It has to be transported to and from the cells by carriers called lipoproteins .
Regular aerobic exercise also lowers LDL cholesterol and increases HDL cholesterol .
Low-density lipoprotein , or LDL , is known as `` bad '' cholesterol .
High-density lipoprotein -LRB- HDL -RRB- is known as good cholesterol .
When too much LDL cholesterol circulates in the blood , it can slowly build up in the inner walls of the The USDAs MyPyramid recommends that you limit the amount of such foods in your diet to occasional treats .
If a clot forms and blocks a narrowed artery , a heart attack or stroke can result .
Cholesterol comes from the food you eat as well as being made by the body .
To lower bad cholesterol , a diet low in saturated fat and dietary cholesterol should be followed .
The 1,000 or so species of cartilaginous fish are subdivided into two subclasses : the first includes sharks , rays , and skates ; the second includes chimaera , sometimes called ghost sharks .
Skeletons made of cartilage rather than bone .
Cartilage is supportive tissue that does not have as much calcium as bones , which makes bones rigid .
So why did fish eventually evolve to have jaws ?
Such an adaptation would allow fish to eat a much wider variety of food , including plants and other organisms .
Other characteristics of cartilaginous fish include : Paired fins .
Since they do not have bone marrow -LRB- as they have no bones -RRB- , red blood cells are produced in the spleen , in special tissue around the reproductive organs , and in an organ called Leydigs organ , only found in cartilaginous fishes .
The tough skin of this group of fish is covered with placoid scales , which are hard scales formed from modified teeth .
The scales are covered with a hard enamel .
The hard covering and the way the scales are arranged , gives the fish skin rough , sandpaper-like feel .
The shape of sharks teeth differ according to their diet .
Species that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense flattened teeth for crushing , those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping , and those that feed on larger prey , such as mammals , have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting .
Sharks continually shed and replace their teeth , with some shedding as much as 35,000 teeth in a lifetime .
An elongated , toothed snout used for slashing the fish that they eat , as seen in sawsharks .
Teeth used for grasping and crushing shellfish , a characteristic of bullhead sharks .
A whisker-like organ named barbels that help sharks find food , a characteristic of carpet sharks .
Ovoviviparous reproduction , where the eggs develop inside the mothers body after internal fertilization , and the young are born alive .
All sharks mate by internal fertilization .
Some sharks then lay their eggs , others allow internal development .
Sharks are some of the most frequently studied cartilaginous fish .
Sharks are distinguished by such features as : The number of gill slits .
But cells do not `` eat '' apples or candy bars ; these foods need to be broken down so that cells can use them .
Through the process of cellular respiration , the energy in food is changed into energy that can be used by the bodys cells .
Initially , the sugars in the food you eat are digested into the simple sugar glucose , a monosaccharide .
Recall that glucose is the sugar produced by the plant during photosynthesis .
The glucose , or the polysaccharide made from many glucose molecules , such as starch , is then passed to the organism that eats the plant .
Either way , it is the glucose molecules that holds the energy .
Specifically , during cellular respiration , the energy stored in glucose is transferred to ATP -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
ATP , or adenosine triphosphate , is chemical energy the cell can use .
Energy is stored in the bonds between the phosphate groups -LRB- PO4 -RRB- of the ATP molecule .
When ATP is broken down into ADP -LRB- adenosine diphosphate -RRB- and inorganic phosphate , energy is released .
When ADP and inorganic phosphate are joined to form ATP , energy is stored .
During cellular respiration , about 36 to 38 ATP molecules are produced for every glucose molecule .
During cellular respi - ration , energy from the chemical bonds of the food you eat must be transferred to ATP .
It is the molecule that provides energy for your cells to perform work , such as moving your muscles as you walk down the street .
But cellular respiration is slightly more complicated than just converting the energy from glucose into ATP .
Cellular respiration can be described as the reverse or opposite of photosynthesis .
During cellular respiration , glucose , in the presence of oxygen , is converted into carbon dioxide and water .
Recall that carbon dioxide and water are the starting products of photosynthesis .
The process can be summarized as : glucose + oxygen carbon dioxide + water .
During this process , the energy stored in glucose is transferred to ATP .
The bony skull protects the brain .
The spinal cord is protected within the bones of the spine , which are called vertebrae .
The brain controls the organs in our body and our movements as well .
The brain consists of three main parts , the cerebrum , the cerebellum , and the brain stem -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The cerebrum controls functions that we are aware of , such as problem-solving and speech .
The cerebellum controls body position , coordination , and balance .
Whether you are riding a bicycle or writing with a pen , you are using your cerebellum .
The brain stem controls basic body functions , such as breathing , heartbeat , and digestion .
The brain stem also carries information back and forth between the cerebrum and spinal cord .
The cerebrum is divided into a right and left half -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Each half of the cerebrum is called a hemisphere .
The two hemispheres are connected by a thick bundle of axons called the corpus callosum .
Did you know that the right hemisphere controls the left side of the body , and the left hemisphere controls the right side of the body ?
By connecting the two hemispheres , the corpus callosum allows this to happen .
Each hemisphere of the cerebrum is divided into four parts , called lobes .
Some of the functions are listed below -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- .
All those neurons use a lot of energy .
In fact , the adult brain uses almost a quarter of the total energy used by the body .
The developing brain of a baby uses an even greater amount of the bodys total energy .
The spinal cord is a long , tube-shaped bundle of neurons , protected by the vertebrae .
If you pull a flower petal from a plant and break it in half , and then take that piece and break it in half again , and take the next piece and break it half , and so on , and so on , until you can not even see the flower anymore , what do you think you will find ?
We know that the flower petal is made of cells , but what are cells made of ?
Atoms are the building block of all of the elements that make up the matter in your body or any other living or non-living thing .
Atoms are so small that only the most powerful microscopes can see them .
Atoms themselves are composed of even smaller particles , including positively charged protons , uncharged neu - trons , and negatively charged electrons .
Protons and neutrons are located in the center of the atom , or the nucleus , and the electrons move around the nucleus .
How many protons an atom has determines what element it is .
An atom usually has the same number of protons and electrons , but sometimes an atom may gain or lose an electron , giving the atom a positive or negative charge .
These atoms are known as ions and are depicted with a '' + '' or '' - '' sign .
Scientists have broken down matter , or anything that takes up space and has masslike a cellinto the smallest pieces that can not be broken down anymore .
An atom of Helium -LRB- He -RRB- contains two positively charged protons -LRB- red -RRB- , two uncharged neutrons -LRB- blue -RRB- , and two negatively charged electrons -LRB- yellow -RRB- .
Every physical object , including rocks , animals , flowers , and your body , are all made up of matter .
Matter is made up of a mixture of things called elements .
Elements are substances that can not be broken down into simpler substances .
There are more than 100 known elements , and 92 occur naturally around us .
The others have been made only in the laboratory .
In 1869 , a Russian scientist named Dmitri Mendeleev created the periodic table , which is a way of organizing elements according to their unique characteristics , like atomic number , density , boiling point , and other values -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Each element is represented by a one or two letter symbol .
For example , H stands for hydrogen , and Au stands for gold .
The vertical columns in the periodic table are known as groups , and elements in groups tend to have very similar properties .
The table is also divided into rows , known as periods .
The oxygen in the air we breathe is two oxygen atoms connected by a chemical bond to form O2 , or molecular oxygen .
Atoms also come together to form compounds much larger than water .
It is some of these large compounds that come together to form the basis of the cell .
So essentially , your cells are made out of compounds , which are made out of atoms .
Because carbon dioxide includes two different elements , it is a compound as well as a molecule .
Elements and combinations of elements -LRB- compounds -RRB- make up all the many types of matter in the Universe .
A chemical reaction is a process that breaks or forms the bonds between atoms of molecules and compounds .
For example , two hydrogens and one oxygen bind together to form water , H2 O.
The molecules that come together to start a chemical reaction are the reactants .
Instead , an error in a larger part of the chromosome or even in an entire chromosome causes the disorder .
Usually the error happens when the egg or sperm is forming .
Having extra chromosomes or damaged chromosomes can cause disorders .
Down syndrome occurs when a baby receives an extra chromosome 21 from one of his or her parents .
Usually , a child will receive one chromosome 21 from the mother and one chromosome 21 from the father .
Therefore , Down syndrome is also known as Trisomy 21 .
Another example of a chromosomal disorder is Klinefelter syndrome , in which a male inherits an extra X chromosome .
Chromosomal disorders also occur when part of a chromosome becomes damaged .
These individuals have misshapen facial features , and the infants cry resembles a cats cry .
The lymphatic system is a network of vessels and tissues that carry a clear fluid called lymph .
The lymphatic system -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- spreads all around the body and filters and cleans the lymph of any debris , abnormal cells , or pathogens .
The lymphatic system works with the cardiovascular system to return body fluids to the blood .
The lymphatic system and the cardiovascular system are often called the bodys two `` circulatory systems . ''
Organs of the lymphatic system include the tonsils , thymus gland and spleen .
The thymus gland produces T cells or T-lymphocytes -LRB- see below -RRB- and the spleen and tonsils help in fighting infections .
The spleen also detects viruses and bacteria and triggers the release of pathogen fighting cells .
The lymphatic system helps return fluid that leaks from the blood vessels back to the cardiovascular system .
Lymph capillaries collect fluid that leaks out from blood capillaries .
The lymphatic vessels return the fluid to the cardiovas - cular system .
The lymphatic system makes sure leaked blood returns back to the bloodstream .
When a small amount of fluid leaks out from the blood vessels , it collects in the spaces between cells and tissues .
Some of the fluid returns to the cardiovascular system , and the rest is collected by the lymph vessels of the lymphatic system -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The fluid that collects in the lymph vessels is called lymph .
Unlike the cardiovascular system , the lymphatic system is not closed -LRB- meaning it is an open circulatory system that releases and collects fluid -RRB- and has no central pump -LRB- or heart -RRB- .
The lymphatic system also plays an important role in the immune system .
For example , the lymphatic system makes white blood cells that protect the body from diseases .
Cells of the lymphatic system produce two types of white blood cells , T cells and B cells , that are involved in fighting specific pathogens .
Lymph nodes , which are scattered throughout the lymphatic system , act as filters or traps for foreign particles and are important in the proper functioning of the immune system .
The role of the lymphatic system in the immune response is discussed in additional concepts .
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are connected through an important relationship .
This relationship enables life to survive as we know it .
Cellular respiration works best in the presence of oxygen .
While cellular respiration releases carbon dioxide into the environment , photosynthesis pulls carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere .
The exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen during photosynthesis -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- and cellular respiration worldwide helps to keep atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide at stable levels .
Energy from the sun enters a plant and is con - verted into glucose during photosynthe - sis .
Some of the energy is used to make ATP in the mitochondria during cellular respiration , and some is lost to the envi - ronment as heat .
Notice that the equation for cellular respiration is the direct opposite of photosynthesis : Cellular Respiration : C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 6CO2 + 6H2 O Photosynthesis : 6CO2 + 6H2 O C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 Photosynthesis makes the glucose that is used in cellular respiration to make ATP .
The glucose is then turned back into carbon dioxide , which is used in photosynthesis .
While water is broken down to form oxygen during photosynthesis , in cellular respiration oxygen is combined with hydrogen to form water .
While photosynthesis requires carbon dioxide and releases oxygen , cellular respiration requires oxygen and releases carbon dioxide .
It is the released oxygen that is used by us and most other organisms for cellular respiration .
We breathe in that oxygen , which is carried through our blood to all our cells .
In our cells , oxygen allows cellular respiration to proceed .
Diabetes is a non-infectious disease in which the body is unable to control the amount of sugar in the blood .
People with diabetes have high blood sugar , either because their bodies do not produce enough insulin , or because their cells do not respond to insulin .
Having a family member with diabetes increases the risk of developing the disease .
Either type of diabetes can increase the chances of having other health problems .
Insulin is a hormone that helps cells take up sugar from the blood .
Without enough insulin , the blood contains too much sugar .
This can damage blood vessels and other cells throughout the body .
The kidneys work hard to filter out and remove some of the extra sugar .
This leads to frequent urination and excessive thirst .
Type 1 diabetes makes up about 5-10 % of all cases of diabetes in the United States .
Type 1 diabetes occurs when the immune system attacks normal cells of the pancreas .
Since the cells in the pancreas are damaged , the pancreas can not make insulin .
This is one type of meter used by people with diabetes to measure their blood sugar .
Type 1 diabetes usually develops in childhood or adolescence .
People with type 1 diabetes must frequently check the sugar in their blood .
Whenever their blood sugar starts to get too high , they need a shot of insulin .
The insulin brings their blood sugar back to normal .
Therefore , insulin shots must be taken for life .
Most people with this type of diabetes learn how to give themselves insulin shots .
Type 2 diabetes occurs when body cells are no longer sensitive to insulin .
The pancreas may still make insulin , but the cells of the body can not use it efficiently .
Type 2 diabetes usually develops in adulthood , but it is becoming more common in teens and children .
However , most people with the disease need to take medicine to control their blood sugar .
Like people with type 1 diabetes , people with type 2 diabetes must frequently check their blood sugar .
Common symptoms of diabetes include the following : frequent urination feeling very thirsty feeling very hungry , even though you are eating extreme fatigue blurry vision cuts or bruises that are slow to heal weight loss , even though you are eating more -LRB- type 1 -RRB- tingling , pain , or numbness in the hands or feet -LRB- type 2 -RRB-
Complications of diabetes can include the following : eye complications foot complications skin complications high blood pressure hearing issues nerve damage kidney disease artery disease stroke stress
The waves pass through the digestive system like waves through a slinky .
This movement of muscle contractions is called peristalsis .
Without peristalsis , food would not be able to move through the digestive system .
Peristalsis is an involuntary process , which means that it occurs without your conscious control .
Food does not pass through these three organs .
They secrete or store enzymes or other chemicals that are needed to help digest food chemically .
Food enters the mouth and then passes through the rest of the digestive system .
The organs of the digestive system are lined with muscles .
The muscles contract , or tighten , to push food through the system -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The mouth is the first organ that food enters .
But digestion may start even before you put the first bite of food into your mouth .
They cut and tear food when you bite into it .
Your tongue pushes the food to the back of your mouth so you can swallow it .
When you swallow , the lump of chewed food passes down your throat to your esophagus .
The esophagus is a narrow tube that carries food from the throat to the stomach .
At the lower end of the esophagus , a circular muscle controls the opening to the stomach .
Just seeing or smelling food can cause the release of saliva and digestive enzymes in your mouth .
The muscle relaxes to let food pass into the stomach .
Then the muscle contracts again to prevent food from passing back into the esophagus .
Some people think that gravity moves food through the esophagus .
If that were true , food would move through the esophagus only when you are sitting or standing upright .
In fact , because of peristalsis , food can move through the esophagus no matter what position you are ineven upside down !
This moves the food around and helps break it into smaller pieces .
This diagram shows how muscles push food through the digestive system .
Mixing the food around with the enzyme pepsin and other chemicals helps digest proteins .
Water , salt , and simple sugars can be absorbed into the blood from the stomach .
Most other substances are broken down further in the small intestine before they are absorbed .
The stomach stores food until the small intestine is ready to receive it .
A circular muscle controls the opening between the stomach and small intestine .
When the small intestine is empty , the muscle relaxes .
Muscle contractions travel through the system in waves , pushing the food ahead of them .
This is called peristalsis .
Once you start eating , saliva wets the food , which makes it easier to break up and swallow .
Digestive enzymes , including the enzyme amylase , start breaking down starches into sugars .
Your tongue helps mix the food with the saliva and enzymes .
Your teeth also help digest food .
The small intestine a is narrow tube that starts at the stomach and ends at the large intestine -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Chemical digestion takes place in the first part of the small intestine .
Many enzymes and other chemicals are secreted here .
The small intestine is also where most nutrients are absorbed into the blood .
The later sections of the small intestines are covered with tiny projections called villi -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Villi contain very tiny blood vessels .
Nutrients are absorbed into the blood through these tiny vessels .
In fact , villi make the inner surface area of the small intestine 1,000 times larger than it would be without them .
Waste enters the large intestine from the small intestine in a liquid state .
After the excess water is absorbed , the remaining solid waste is called feces .
Circular muscles control the anus .
They relax to let the feces pass out of the body through the anus .
After feces pass out of the body , they are called stool .
Releasing the stool from the body is referred to as a bowel movement .
The nervous system controls sensing , feeling , and thinking .
Thats why problems with the nervous system can affect the entire body .
Diseases of the nervous system include brain and spinal cord infections .
But bacteria and viruses can infect these organs as well as other parts of the body .
The disease is most often caused by viruses .
The immune system tries to fight off a brain infection , just as it tries to fight off other infections .
The immune systems response may cause swelling in the brain .
With no room to expand , the brain pushes against the skull .
This may injure the brain and even cause death .
Medicines can help fight some viral infections of the brain , but not all infections .
Meningitis is an infection of the membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord .
Many doctors recommend that children receive the vaccine no later than age 12 or 13 , or before they begin high school .
Viral meningitis often clears up on its own after a few days .
They are usually given antibiotics to kill the bacteria .
A vaccine to prevent meningitis recently became available .
A condition called Reyes syndrome can occur in young people that take aspirin when they have a viral infection .
The syndrome causes swelling of the brain and may be fatal .
The best way to prevent it is by not taking aspirin when you have a viral infection .
Products like cold medicines often contain aspirin .
So , read labels carefully when taking any medicines -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Since 1988 , the U.S. Food and Drug Ad - ministration has required that all aspirin and aspirin-containing products carry a warning about Reyes syndrome .
Like other parts of the body , the nervous system may develop tumors .
A tumor is a mass of cells that grows out of control .
The disease usually affects the parts of the brain that control body movements .
Symptoms range from weak muscles in mild cases to trouble walking and talking in more severe cases .
Epilepsy is a disease that causes seizures .
The seizures of epilepsy can often be controlled with medicine .
A tumor in the brain may press on normal brain tissues .
A tension headache occurs when muscles in the shoulders , neck , and head become too tense .
This often happens when people are stressed out .
Just trying to relax may help relieve this type of headache .
Sometimes relaxation is the best medicine for a tension headache and to help muscles get rid of pain .
It occurs when blood vessels in the head dilate , or expand .
This can cause headaches , difficulty speaking , or other problems , depending on where the tumor is located .
This may be triggered by certain foods , bright lights , weather changes , or other factors .
Fortunately , migraines can often be relieved with prescription drugs .
However , these diseases rarely , if ever , occur in young people .
The diseases have no known cure , but medicines may help control their symptoms .
Disease Multiple sclerosis Cause The immune system attacks and damages the central nervous sys - tem so neurons can not function nor - mally .
Pressure from a tumor can even cause permanent brain damage .
In many cases , brain tumors can be removed with surgery .
In other cases , tumors cant be removed without damaging the brain even more .
Cerebral palsy is a disease caused by injury to the developing brain .
The injury occurs before , during , or shortly after birth .
DNA is the material that makes up our chromosomes and stores our genetic information .
The genetic information is a set of instructions that tell your cells what to do .
The deoxyribo part of the name refers to the name of the sugar that is contained in DNA , deoxyribose .
DNA may provide the instructions to make up all living things , but it is actually a very simple molecule .
DNA is made of a very long chain of nucleotides .
Nucleotides are composed of three main parts : 1 . a phosphate group .
There are only four possible bases that make up each DNA nucleotide : adenine -LRB- A -RRB- , guanine -LRB- G -RRB- , thymine -LRB- T -RRB- , and cytosine -LRB- C -RRB- .
The various sequences of the four nucleotide bases make up the genetic code of your cells .
But since your chromosomes contain millions of nucleotides , there are many , many different combinations possible with those four letters .
But how do all these pieces fit together ?
James Watson and Francis Crick won the Nobel Prize in 1962 for piecing together the structure of DNA .
Together with the work of Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins , they determined that DNA is made of two strands of nucleotides formed into a double helix , or a two-stranded spiral , with the sugar and phosphate groups on the outside , and the paired bases connecting the two strands on the inside of the helix -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The bases in DNA do not pair randomly .
When Erwin Chargaff looked closely at the bases in DNA , he noticed that the percentage of adenine -LRB- A -RRB- in the DNA always equaled the percentage of thymine -LRB- T -RRB- , and the percentage of guanine -LRB- G -RRB- always equaled the percentage of cytosine -LRB- C -RRB- .
Watson and Cricks model explained this result by suggesting that A always pairs with T , and G always pairs with C in the DNA helix .
Therefore A and T , and G and C , are `` complementary bases , '' or bases that always pair together , known as a base-pair .
The base-pairing rules state that A will always bind to T , and G will always bind to C -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
For example , if one DNA strand reads ATGCCAGT , the other strand will be made up of the complementary bases : TACGGTCA .
Hydrogen bonds hold the complementary bases together , with two bonds forming between an A and a T , and three bonds between a G and a C . The chemical structure of DNA includes a chain of nucleotides consisting of a 5 - carbon sugar , a phosphate group , and a nitrogen base .
Notice how the sugar and phosphate group form the backbone of DNA -LRB- strands highlighted in pink -RRB- , with the hydrogen bonds between the bases joining the two strands .
This means that the body is arranged around a central point .
Echinoderms belong to the phylum Echinodermata .
This phylum includes 7,000 living species .
As mentioned earlier , echinoderms show radial symmetry .
Other key echinoderm features include an internal skeleton and spines , as well as a few organs and organ systems .
This network of fluid-filled tubes helps them to breathe , eat , and move .
The digestive system often leads directly from the mouth to the anus .
This may be due to their simple radial symmetry - a heart is not needed to pump the freely moving fluid .
Although echinoderms look like they have a hard exterior , they do not have an external skeleton .
For example , some sea stars -LRB- starfish -RRB- are capable of regenerating lost arms .
In some cases , lost arms have been observed to regenerate a second complete sea star !
Sea cucumbers often release parts of their internal organs if they perceive danger .
Instead , a thin outer skin covers an internal skeleton made of tiny plates and spines .
This provides rigid support .
Some groups of echinoderms , such as sea urchins -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- , have spines that protect the organism .
Sea cucumbers use these spines to help them move .
A starfish -LRB- left -RRB- and a keyhole sand dollar -LRB- right -RRB- , showing the radial symmetry char - acteristic of the echinoderms .
Starfish are also known as sea stars .
Another echinoderm , a sea urchin -LRB- Echi - nus esculentus -RRB- , showing its spines .
Feeding strategies vary greatly among the different groups of echinoderms .
Theres no one food or technique thats shared by all echinoderms .
Deposit feeders , which are organisms that feed on small pieces of organic matter , usually in the top layer of soil .
Sea cucumbers are deposit feeders , living on the ocean floor .
They eat the tiny scrap particles that are usually abundant in the environments that they inhabit .
Many sea stars are predators , feeding on mollusks like clams by prying apart their shells and actually placing their stomach inside the mollusk shell to digest the meat .
Passive filter-feeders , which are organisms that absorb suspended nutrients from passing water .
Some echino - derms use their long arms to capture food particles floating past in the currents .
Grazers , such as sea urchins , are organisms that feed on available plants .
Sea urchins are omnivorous , eating both plant and animals .
Echinoderms reproduce sexually .
In most echinoderms , eggs and sperm cells are released into open water , and fertilization takes place when the eggs and sperm meet .
This is called external fertilization , and is typical of many marine animals .
The release of sperm and eggs often occurs when organisms are in the same place at the same time .
Drinking water can also be affected if a toxin enters the groundwater .
Through photosynthesis , they provide glucose for the ecosystem .
This process uses oxygen , removing the oxygen from the water .
Certain types of algal blooms can also create toxins .
These toxins can enter shellfish .
If humans eat these shellfish , then they can get very sick .
These toxins cause neurological problems in humans .
Usually these nutrients are the nitrogen and phosphorous found in fertilizers .
Run-off from lawns or farms can wash fertilizers into rivers or coastal waters .
Plants are not the only things that grow more quickly with added fertilizers .
When there are high levels of nutrients in the water , algae populations will grow large very quickly .
This leads to overgrowths of algae called algal blooms .
Ocean acidification occurs when excess carbon dioxide in the atmosphere causes the oceans to become acidic .
Burning fossil fuels has led to an increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere .
This carbon dioxide is then absorbed by the oceans , which lowers the pH of the water .
Ocean acidification can kill corals and shellfish .
It may also cause marine organisms to reproduce less , which could harm other organisms in the food chain .
As a result , there also may be fewer marine organisms for humans to consume .
Aquatic debris is trash that gets into fresh - and saltwater waterways .
Some animals may swallow plastic bags , mistaking them for food .
Other animals can be strangled by floating trash like plastic six-pack rings .
Wildlife can easily get tangled in nets -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Marine trash can harm different types of aquatic life .
Pictured here is a marine turtle entangled in a net .
These diseases can be caused by protozoa , viruses , bacteria , and intestinal parasites .
If sewage or animal manure gets into a river , then people downstream will get sick when they drink the water .
It was estimated that 88 % of the cases of diarrheal disease are caused by unsafe water supplies .
When an herbivore eats a plant , the energy in the plant tissues is used by the herbivore .
But how much of that energy is transferred to the herbivore ?
The rest of the energy is used by the herbivore and released as heat .
The next consumer on the food chain that eats the herbivore will only store about 10 % of the total energy from the herbivore in its own body .
This means the carnivore will store only about 1 % of the total energy that was originally in the plant .
In other words , only about 10 % of energy of one step in a food chain is stored in the next step in the food chain .
The majority of the energy is used by the organism or released to the environment .
Every time energy is transferred from one organism to another , there is a loss of energy .
This loss of energy can be shown in an energy pyramid .
An example of an energy pyramid is pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Since there is energy loss at each step in a food chain , it takes many producers to support just a few carnivores in a community .
Each step of the food chain in the energy pyramid is called a trophic level .
Remember that plants are producers , bringing the energy into the ecosystem by converting sunlight into glucose .
Plants or other photosynthetic organisms -LRB- autotrophs -RRB- are found on the first trophic level , at the bottom of the pyramid .
The next level will be the herbivores , and then the carnivores that eat the herbivores .
The energy pyramid -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- shows four levels of a food chain , from producers to carnivores .
There just is not enough energy to support any additional trophic levels .
Heterotrophs are found in all levels of an energy pyramid other than the first level .
Does the plant use some of the energy for its own needs ?
It converts the glucose it makes into ATP through cellular respiration just like other organisms .
After the plant uses the energy from glucose for its own needs , the excess energy is available to the organism that eats the plant .
The herbivore uses the energy from the plant to power its own life processes and to build more body tissues .
However , only about 10 % of the total energy from the plant gets stored in the herbivores body as extra body tissue .
An enzyme is a protein that speeds up chemical reactions in the body .
Digestive enzymes are released , or secreted , by the organs of the digestive system .
These enzymes include proteases that digest proteins , and nucleases that digest nucleic acids .
Examples of digestive enzymes are : Amylase , produced in the mouth .
Pepsin , produced in the stomach .
Pepsin helps break down proteins into amino acids .
Trypsin , produced in the pancreas .
Trypsin also breaks down proteins .
Pancreatic lipase , produced in the pancreas .
Digestive enzymes speed up chemical reactions that break down large food molecules into small molecules .
Deoxyribonuclease and ribonuclease , produced in the pancreas .
They are enzymes that break bonds in nucleic acids like DNA and RNA .
Bile salts are bile acids that help to break down fat .
Bile acids are made in the liver .
When you eat a meal , bile is secreted into the intestine , where it breaks down the fats -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Did you ever use a wrench to tighten a bolt ?
They make it much easier and quicker for chemical reactions to take place .
Like a wrench , enzymes can also be used over and over again .
But you need the appropriate size and shape of the wrench to efficiently tighten the bolt , just like each enzyme is specific for the reaction it helps .
For your body to break down , absorb and spread the nutrients from your food throughout your body , your digestive system and endocrine system need to work together .
Ghrelin , which signals when you are hungry .
Gastric inhibitory polypeptide , which stops or decreases gastric secretion .
The endocrine system sends hormones around your body to communicate between cells .
Digestive hormones are made by cells lining the stomach and small intestine .
These hormones cross into the blood where they can affect other parts of the digestive system .
Some of these hormones are listed below .
Cholecystokinin , which signals the secretion of pancreatic enzymes .
Secretin , which signals secretion of water and bicarbonate from the pancreas .
Natural selection acts on the phenotype -LRB- the traits or characteristics -RRB- of an individual .
On the other hand , natural selection does not act on the underlying genotype -LRB- the genetic makeup -RRB- of an individual .
So natural selection can not select for a homozygous individual over a heterozygous individual .
Even if the `` aa '' phenotype is lethal , the recessive a allele , will be maintained in the population through heterozygous Aa individuals .
Furthermore , the mating of two heterozygous individuals can produce homozygous recessive -LRB- aa -RRB- individuals .
However , natural selection can and does differentiate between dominant and recessive phenotypes .
Since natural selection acts on the phenotype , if an allele causes death in a homozygous individual , aa , for example , it will not cause death in a heterozygous Aa individual .
These heterozygous Aa individuals will then act as carriers of the a allele , meaning that the a allele could be passed down to offspring .
This happens because evolution acts on the phenotype , not the genotype -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Tay-Sachs disease is inherited in the au - tosomal recessive pattern .
People who are carriers do not express the recessive phenotype , as they have a dominant allele .
This allele is said to be kept in the populations gene pool .
That means only individuals with the homozygous recessive genotype , rr will be affected .
Affected individuals usually die from complications of the disease in early childhood , at an age too young to reproduce .
This deadly allele is kept in the gene pool even though it does not help humans adapt to their environment .
Sometimes your body is low on water and trying to reduce the amount of water lost in urine .
Therefore , your urine gets darker than usual .
Your body is striving to maintain homeostasis through the process of excretion .
Urine helps remove excess water , salts , and nitrogen from your body .
Your body also needs to remove the wastes that build up from cell activity and from digestion .
If these wastes are not removed , your cells can stop working , and you can get very sick .
The organs of your excretory system help to release wastes from the body .
Your lungs remove carbon dioxide from your body , so they are also part of the excretory system .
More organs of the excretory system are listed below -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- .
Organ -LRB- s -RRB- Function Lungs Skin Remove carbon dioxide .
Sweat glands remove water , salts , and other wastes .
Removes solid waste and some wa - ter in the form of feces .
Excretion is the process of removing wastes and excess water from the body .
Recall that carbon dioxide travels through the blood and is transferred to the lungs where it is exhaled .
In the large intestine , the remains of food are turned into solid waste for excretion .
How is waste other than carbon dioxide removed from the blood ?
Urine is a liquid waste formed by the kidneys as they filter the blood .
The urinary system controls the amount of water in the body and removes wastes .
Any problem with the urinary system can also affect many other body systems .
In some cases , certain mineral wastes can form kidney stones -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Stones form in the kidneys and may be found anywhere in the urinary system .
If you have a small stone that passes on its own easily , you may not experience any symptoms .
The stones can form anywhere in the urinary system .
Often , stones form when the urine becomes concentrated , allowing minerals to crystallize and stick together .
They can vary in size , from small stones that can flow through your urinary system , to larger stones that can not .
Some stones cause great pain , while others cause very little pain .
Some stones may need to be removed by surgery or ultrasound treatments .
You may have a kidney stone if you have pain while urinating , see blood in your urine , and/or feel a sharp pain in your back or lower abdomen -LRB- the area between your chest and hips -RRB- .
The pain may last for a long or short time .
Kidney failure happens when the kidneys can not remove wastes from the blood .
If the kidneys are unable to filter wastes from the blood , the wastes build up in the body .
Kidney failure can be caused by an accident that injures the kidneys , the loss of a lot of blood , or by some drugs and poisons .
Kidney failure may lead to permanent loss of kidney function .
Chronic kidney disease is the slow decrease in kidney function that may lead to permanent kidney failure .
A person who has lost kidney function may need to get kidney dialysis .
Kidney dialysis is the process of filtering the blood of wastes using a machine .
A dialysis machine -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- filters waste from the blood by pumping the blood through a fake kidney .
The filtered blood is then returned to the patients body .
When bacteria get into the bladder or kidney and produce more bacteria in the urine , they cause a UTI .
Your doctor will diagnose a UTIs by asking about your symptoms and then testing a sample of your urine .
Women get UTIs more often than men .
UTIs are often treated with antibiotics .
Long lasting kidney infections can cause permanent damage , including kidney scars , poor kidney function , high blood pressure , and other problems .
Some sudden kidney infections can be life threatening , especially if the bacteria enter the bloodstream , a condition called septicemia .
A population is a group of organisms of the same species , all living in the same area and interacting with each other .
Some species may be clumped or clustered -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- in an area .
Others may be evenly spaced -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Still others may be spaced randomly within an area .
A population of cacti in the Sonoran Desert generally shows even dispersion due to competition for water .
Ecologists also study the birth and death rates of the population .
Ecologists who study populations determine how healthy or stable the populations are .
Together these give the growth rate -LRB- the birth rate minus the death rate -RRB- , which tells how fast -LRB- or slow -RRB- the population size is changing .
For example , when a population is made up of mostly young organisms and the birth rate is high , the population is growing .
A population with equal birth and death rates will remain the same size .
Populations that are decreasing in size have a higher death rate than birth rate .
They also study how the individuals of a species interact with each other and how populations interact with the environment .
If a group of similar organisms in the same area can not reproduce with members of the other group , then they are members of two distinct species and form two populations .
Ecologists look at many factors that help to describe a population .
First , ecologists can measure the number of individuals that make up the population , known as population size .
Population density can be expressed as number per area , such as 20 mice/acre , or 50 rabbits/square mile .
Ecologists also study how individuals in a population are spread across an environment .
The female reproductive organs include the vagina , uterus , fallopian tubes , and ovaries -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The breasts are not shown in this figure .
During birth , a baby passes from the uterus to the vagina to leave the body .
The part that connects the vagina with the uterus is called the cervix .
The walls of the uterus grow bigger as the baby grows .
The muscular walls of the uterus push the baby out during birth .
This drawing shows the organs of the female reproductive system .
Find each organ in the drawing as you read about it in the text .
Each ovary contains thousands of eggs , with about 1-2 million immature eggs present at birth and 40,000 immature eggs present at puberty , as most of the eggs die off .
The eggs do not fully develop until a female has gone through puberty .
About once a month , on average one egg completes development and is released by the ovary .
The ovaries also secrete estrogen , the main female sex hormone .
The two fallopian tubes are narrow tubes that open off from the uterus .
Each tube reaches for one of the ovaries , but the tubes are not attached to the ovaries .
Then the egg passes through the fallopian tube to the uterus .
If an egg is to be fertilized , this will occur in the fallopian tube .
They contain mammary glands that give milk to feed a baby .
A fertilized egg then implants into the wall of the uterus , where it begins to develop .
An unfertilized egg will flow through the uterus and be excreted from the body .
The milk leaves the breast through the nipple when the baby sucks on it .
The vagina is a cylinder-shaped organ found inside of the female body .
One end of the vagina opens at the outside of the body .
During sexual intercourse , sperm may be released into the vagina .
If this occurs , the sperm will move through the vagina and into the uterus .
After puberty , females release only one egg at a time .
Eggs are actually made in the body before birth , but they do not fully develop until later in life .
Like sperm , eggs are produced by meiosis , so they contain half the number of chromosomes as the original cell .
Another role of the female system is to secrete estrogen .
During the teen years , estrogen causes the reproductive organs to develop .
During adulthood , estrogen is needed for a woman to release eggs .
On average , a woman releases one egg each month from her ovaries .
After puberty , the female reproductive system must prepare itself to accept a fertilized egg each cycle -LRB- about every month -RRB- .
This cycle is controlled by a well-planned and very complex interplay of hormones .
The female reproductive system also supports a baby as it develops before birth , and it facilitates the babys birth at the end of pregnancy .
Produces gametes , the reproductive cells , which are called eggs in females .
One of the main roles of the female reproductive system is to produce eggs .
Sometimes cells need to obtain energy from sugar , but there is no oxygen present to complete cellular respiration .
In this situation , cellular respiration can be anaerobic , occurring in the absence of oxygen .
The carbon dioxide bubbles allow the bread to rise and become fluffy .
In wine making , the sugars of grapes are fermented to produce wine .
Animals and some bacteria and fungi carry out lactic acid fermentation .
Our muscles perform lactic acid fermentation during strenuous exercise , since oxygen can not be delivered to the muscles quickly enough .
Bacteria that produce lactic acid are used to make cheese and yogurt .
The lactic acid causes the proteins in milk to thicken .
In this process , called fermentation , only the first step of respiration , glycolysis , occurs , producing two ATP ; no additional ATP is produced .
Lactic acid also causes tooth decay , because bacteria use the sugars in your mouth for energy .
Pictured below are some products of fermentation -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Products of fermentation include cheese -LRB- lactic acid fermentation -RRB- and wine -LRB- alco - holic fermentation -RRB- .
Therefore , the organism only obtains the two ATP molecules per glucose molecule from glycolysis .
Fermentation allows the first step of cellular respiration to continue and produce some ATP , even without oxygen .
Yeast -LRB- single-celled eukaryotic organisms -RRB- perform alcoholic fermentation in the absence of oxygen .
This process is used to make common food and drinks .
For example , alcoholic fermentation is used to bake bread .
Behind every fart is an army of gut bacteria undergoing some crazy biochemistry .
These bacteria break down the remains of digested food through fermentation , creating gas in the process .
Learn what these bacteria have in common with beer brewing at http://youtu.be/R1kxajH629A?list=PLzMhsCgGKd1hoofiKuifwy6qRXZs7NG6a .
They also have a streamlined body that allows them to swim rapidly .
Fish are aquatic vertebrates , meaning they have backbones .
You may say that a fish is an animal that swims in the ocean or a lake , using fins .
But as we saw with the mudskipper , not all fish spend all their time in water .
So how do scientists define fish ?
Some characteristics of fish include : 1 .
They are ectothermic , meaning their temperature depends on the temperature of their environment .
Ectother - mic animals are cold-blooded in that they can not raise their body temperature on their own .
This is unlike humans , whose temperature is controlled from inside the body .
In order to absorb oxygen from the water , fish use gills -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Gills take dissolved oxygen from water as the water flows over the surface of the gill .
Gills help a fish breathe .
Fish reproduce sexually .
They lay eggs that can be fertilized either inside or outside of the body .
In most fish , the eggs develop outside of the mothers body .
In the majority of these species , fertilization also takes place outside the mothers body .
The male and female fish release their gametes into the surrounding water , where fertilization occurs .
Female fish release very high numbers of eggs to increase the chances of fertilization .
The second-largest fish is the basking shark , which grows to about 40 feet and 8,000 pounds .
Both of the large sharks may look ferocious , and would probably scare anyone who comes across one in the water , but both species are filter-feeders , and feed on tiny fish and plankton .
The tiny carp species is unique in that it has the appearance of larvae , with a reduced skeleton lacking a cranium , which leaves the brain unprotected by bone .
The fish lives in dark acidic waters , having a pH of 3 .
Keep in mind that whales are not fish , they are mammals .
For example , tuna , swordfish , and some species of shark show some warm-blooded adaptations and are able to raise their body temperature significantly above that of the water around them .
Body shape and the arrangement of fins are highly variable , and the surface of the skin may be naked , as in moray eels , or covered with scales .
Farming fish is known as aquaculture .
Fish are also caught for recreation to display in the home or in a public aquarium .
But it is a word that informally describes animals -LRB- usually invertebrates -RRB- that have long bodies with no arms or legs .
-LRB- Snakes are vertebrates , so they are not usually described as worms . -RRB-
Worms are the first significant group of animals with bilateral symmetry , meaning that the right side of their bodies is a mirror of the left .
Worms in the phylum Platyhelminthes are called flatworms because they have flattened bodies .
Flatworms have no true body cavity , but they do have bilateral symmetry .
Oxygen enters the pores by diffusion .
Their gastrovascular cavity helps distribute nutrients throughout the body .
Flatworms have a ladder-like nervous system ; two interconnected parallel nerve cords run the length of the body .
Most flatworms have a distinct head region that includes nerve cells and sensory organs , such as eyespots .
The development of a head region , called cephalization , evolved at the same time as bilateral symmetry in animals .
This process does not occur in cnidarians , which evolved prior to flatworms and have radial symmetry .
Due to the lack of a body cav - ity , flatworms are known as acoelomates .
Marine flatworms can be brightly colored , such as this one from the class Turbel - laria .
This means that the digestive tract has only one opening .
Instead , they have pores that allow oxygen to enter through their body .
Flatworms live in a variety of environments .
Some species of flatworms are free-living organisms that feed on small organisms and rotting matter .
These types of flatworms include marine flatworms and freshwater flatworms , such as Dugesia .
That means they live inside another organism , called a host , in order to get the food and energy they need .
For example , tapeworms have a head-like area with tiny hooks and suckers -LRB- known as the scolex -RRB- that help the worm attach to the intestines of an animal host -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Did you ever hear the old saying , An apple a day keeps the doctor away ?
Food gives your body energy .
You need energy for everything you do .
Remember that cellular respiration converts the glucose in the food you eat into ATP , or cellular energy .
Do you remember what types of foods produce glucose ?
These girls are eating leafy green vegetables .
Food provides building materials for your body .
Probably not , but eating apples and other fresh fruits can help keep you healthy .
Your body needs building materials so it can grow and repair itself .
Proteins provide building materials , such as amino acids to build your own proteins .
Proteins , vitamins , and minerals also help control body processes .
Carbohydrates include sugars such as the glucose made by photosynthesis .
Often glucose is stored in large molecules such as starch .
Proteins are found in foods like meats and nuts .
Lipids includes fats and oils .
Though you should stay away from many types of fats , others are needed by your body .
Important vitamins include vitamins A , B -LRB- multiple types -RRB- C , D , and E. Important minerals include calcium and potassium .
The girls pictured in the Figure 1.1 are eating salads .
Your body needs food for three reasons : 1 .
Examples of fossils include bones , teeth , and impressions .
Earthquakes , volcanoes , shifting seas , and other movements of the continents have all affected where organisms live and how they adapted to their changing environments .
By studying fossils , evidence for evolution is revealed .
Paleontologists are scientists who study fossils to learn about life in the past .
Fossils allow these scientists to determine the features of extinct species .
Paleontologists compare the features of species from different periods in history .
Through studying fossils , we now know that todays organisms look much different in many cases than those that were alive in the past .
Scientists have also shown that organisms were spread out differently across the planet .
Newer layers form on top of the older layers ; the deepest rock layers are the oldest .
This technique , which is possible because radioactive materials decay at a known rate , measures how much of the radioactive materials in each rock layer have broken down -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Radiometric dating has been used to determine that the oldest known rocks on Earth are between 4 and 5 billion years old .
Remember that during Darwins time , people believed the Earth was just about 6,000 years old .
The fossil record proves that Earth is much older than people once thought .
Therefore , you can tell how old a fossil is by observing in which layer of rock it was found .
Fossil evi - dence , depicted by the skeletal frag - ments , demonstrates evolutionary mile - stones in this process .
The fossils and the order in which fossils appear is called the fossil record .
The fossil record provides evidence for when organisms lived on Earth , how species evolved , and how some species have gone extinct .
Geologists use a method called radiometric dating to determine the exact age of rocks and fossils in each layer of rock .
Many genetic disorders are caused by mutations in one or a few genes .
Others are caused by chromosomal mutations .
Other genetic disorders are carried on one of the other 22 pairs of chromosomes ; these chromosomes are known as autosomes or autosomal -LRB- non-sex -RRB- chromosomes .
Some genetic disorders are due to new mutations , others can be inherited from your parents .
Some genetic disorders are caused by recessive alleles of a single gene on an autosome .
Tay-Sachs disease is a severe genetic disorder in which affected children do not live to adulthood , so the gene is not passed from an affected individual .
How does a child become affected with Tay-Sachs ?
Children with cystic fibrosis have excessively thick mucus in their lungs , which makes it difficult for them to breathe .
The inheritance of this recessive allele is the same as any other recessive allele , so a Punnett square can be used to predict the probability that two carriers of the disease will have a child with cystic fibrosis .
Recall that carriers have the recessive allele for a trait but do not express the trait .
This means that if the dominant allele is present , then the person will express the disease .
A child only has to inherit one dominant allele to have the disease .
The disease causes the brains cells to break down , leading to muscle spasms and personality changes .
Unlike most other genetic disorders , the symptoms usually do not become apparent until middle age .
If you draw the Punnett square , you will find that there is a 50 percent chance of the disorder being passed on to the children .
Sometimes understanding how common a gene is within a population is necessary .
The five conditions that must be met for genetic equilibrium to occur include : 1 .
No migration -LRB- moving into or out of a population -RRB- .
This can be done using the Hardy-Weinberg model , but it can only be done if the frequencies of the genes are not changing .
These five conditions rarely occur in nature .
When one or more of the conditions does not exist , then evolution can occur .
As a result , allele frequencies are constantly changing , and populations are constantly evolving .
As mutations and natural selection occur frequently in nature , it is difficult for a population to be at genetic equilibrium .
The Hardy-Weinberg model also serves a mathematical formula used to predict allele frequencies in a population at genetic equilibrium .
The Hardy-Weinberg model describes how a population can remain at genetic equilibrium , referred to as the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium .
Genetic equilibrium occurs when there is no evolution within the population .
At genetic equilibrium , the gene or allele frequencies are stablethey do not change .
For example , lets assume that red hair is determined by the inheritance of a gene with two allelesR and r . The dominant allele , R , encodes for non-red hair , while the recessive allele , r , encodes for red hair .
If a populations gene pool contains 90 % R and 10 % r alleles , then the next generation would also have 90 % R and 10 % r alleles .
However , this only works under a strict set of conditions .
With so many species of bacteria , some are bound to be harmful .
Harmful bacteria can make you sick .
Bacteria are responsible for many types of human illness -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , including : Strep throat Tuberculosis Pneumonia Leprosy Lyme disease Luckily most of these can be treated with antibiotics , which kill the bacteria .
It is important that when a medical doctor prescribes antibiotics for you , you take the medicine exactly as the doctor tells you .
Bacterial contamination of foods can lead to digestive problems , an illness known as food poisoning .
Raw eggs and undercooked meats commonly carry the bacteria that can cause food poisoning .
Food poisoning can be prevented by cooking meat thoroughly , which kills most microbes , and washing surfaces that have been in contact with raw meat .
Washing your hands before and after handling food also helps prevent contamination .
Some bacteria also have the potential to be used as biological weapons by terrorists .
An example is anthrax , a disease caused by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis .
Inhaling the spores of this bacterium can lead to a deadly infection , and , therefore , it is a dangerous weapon .
In 2001 , an act of terrorism in the United States involved B. anthracis spores sent in letters through the mail .
What are the common bacteria that cause food poisoning ?
What steps can you take to keep your food safe ?
The World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- reports that 2.4 million people die each year from causes directly related to air pollution .
This includes both outdoor and indoor air pollution .
Additional lung and heart diseases are also related to air pollution , as are respiratory allergies .
Air pollution can also indirectly cause other health issues and even deaths .
Air pollutants can cause an increase in cancer including lung cancer , eye problems , and other conditions .
For example , using certain chemicals on farms , such as the insecticide DDT -LRB- dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane -RRB- and toxic PCBs -LRB- polychlorinated biphenyl -RRB- , can cause cancer .
Indoors , pollutants such as radon or asbestos can also increase your cancer risk .
Lastly , air pollution can lead to heart disease , including heart attack and stroke .
Worldwide , there are more deaths linked to air pollution each year than to car accidents .
Research by the WHO also shows that the worst air quality is in countries with high poverty and population rates , such as Egypt , Sudan , Mongolia , and Indonesia .
Respiratory system disorders are directly related to air pollution .
These disorders have severe effects on human health , some leading to death directly related to air pollution .
Air pollution related respiratory disorders include asthma , bronchitis , and emphysema .
Asthma is a respiratory disorder characterized by wheezing , coughing , and a feeling of constriction in the chest .
Emphysema is a deadly lung disease characterized by abnormal enlargement of air spaces in the lungs and destruction of the lung tissue .
Certain respiratory conditions can be made worse in people who live closer to or in large cites .
Some studies have shown that people in urban areas suffer lower levels of lung function and more chronic bronchitis and emphysema .
It is a low-hanging , fog-like cloud that seems to never leave the city -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Smog is caused by coal burning and by ozone produced by motor vehicle exhaust .
Smog can cause eye irritation and respiratory problems .
Make sure air conditioning systems are working properly .
Because you have more control over your indoor air quality than the outdoor air quality , there are some simple steps you can take indoors to make sure the air quality is less polluted .
Make sure that vents and chimneys are working properly , and never burn charcoal indoors .
Harmful bacteria can enter your digestive system in food and make you sick .
This is called foodborne illness or food poisoning .
This helps prevent any bacteria in the foods from multiplying .
This helps prevent bacteria on your hands from getting on the food .
Cook meats , poultry , fish , and eggs thoroughly before eating them .
The heat of cooking kills any bacteria the foods may contain , so they can not make you sick .
Refrigerate cooked food soon after a meal .
Cooked food can be left out for up to two hours before they need to be placed in the cold .
The bacteria , or the toxins they produce , may cause vomiting or cramping , in addition to the symptoms mentioned above .
This will prevent the spread of bacteria .
Cooked foods should not be left out all day .
Bacteria that cause foodborne illnesses include Salmonella , a bacterium found in many foods , including raw and undercooked meat , poultry , dairy products , and seafood .
Campylobacter jejuni is found in raw or undercooked chicken and unpasteurized milk .
Several strains of E. coli can cause illnesses , and are found in raw or undercooked hamburger , unpasteurized fruit juices and milk , and even fresh produce .
Vibrio is a bacterium that may contaminate fish or shellfish .
Listeria has been found in raw and undercooked meats , unpasteurized milk , soft cheeses , and ready - to-eat deli meats and hot dogs .
Most of these bacterial illnesses can be prevented with proper cooking of food and washing of hands .
Common foodborne viruses include norovirus and hepatitis A virus .
Norovirus , which causes inflammation of the stomach and intestines , has been a recent issue on cruise ships , infecting hundreds of passengers and crew on certain voyages .
Foodborne illnesses can also be caused by viruses and parasites .
Hepatitis A causes inflammation of the liver , which is treated with rest and diet changes .
Parasites are tiny organisms that live inside another organism .
Giardia is a parasite spread through water contaminated with the stools of people or animals who are infected .
Food preparers who are infected with parasites can also contaminate food if they do not thoroughly wash their hands after using the bathroom and before handling food .
People may be infected with this parasite by consuming raw or undercooked pork or wild game .
The most common foodborne illnesses happen within a few minutes to a few hours , and make you feel really sick , but last for only about a day or so .
Some people believe that the taste of food will tell you if it is bad .
As a rule , you probably should not eat bad tasting food , but many contaminated foods can still taste good .
They occur when the immune system reacts to harmless substances as though they were harmful .
The most common food allergy symptoms include : tingling or itching in the mouth hives , itching or eczema , swelling of the lips , face , tongue and throat , or other parts of the body , wheezing , nasal congestion or trouble breathing , abdominal pain , diarrhea , nausea or vomiting , dizziness , lightheadedness or fainting .
In some people , a food allergy can trigger a severe allergic reaction called anaphylaxis .
Untreated , anaphylaxis can cause a coma or death .
The life-threatening symptoms of anaphylaxis include : constriction and tightening of the airway , a swollen throat or the sensation of a lump in your throat that makes it difficult to breathe , shock , with a severe drop in blood pressure , a rapid pulse , dizziness , lightheadedness or loss of consciousness .
Some of the foods most likely to cause allergies are shown below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Eating foods you are allergic to may cause vomiting , diarrhea , or skin rashes .
Eating even tiny amounts of the foods causes them to have serious symptoms , such as difficulty breathing .
If they eat the foods by accident , they may need emergency medical treatment .
Some of the foods that commonly cause allergies are shown here .
A food intolerance happens when the digestive system is unable to break down a certain type of food .
This can result in stomach cramping , diarrhea , tiredness , and weight loss .
Food intolerances are often mistakenly called allergies .
A person who is lactose intolerant does not make enough lactase , the enzyme that breaks down the milk sugar , lactose .
It might surprise you to learn that both activities depend on your ears .
The ears do more than just detect sound .
Sound travels through the air in waves , much like the waves you see in the water pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
They explain how your ears sense the sound .
The sound waves travel to the ear canal -LRB- external auditory canal in the figure -RRB- .
Sound waves travel through the air in all directions away from a sound , like waves traveling through water away from where a pebble was dropped .
At the end of the ear canal , the sound waves hit the eardrum -LRB- tympanic membrane -RRB- .
This is a thin membrane that vibrates like the head of a drum when sound waves hit it .
The vibrations pass from the eardrum to the hammer -LRB- malleus -RRB- .
This is the first of three tiny bones that pass vibrations through the ear .
The hammer passes the vibrations to the anvil -LRB- incus -RRB- , the second tiny bone that passes vibrations through the ear .
The anvil passes the vibrations to the stirrup -LRB- stapes -RRB- , the third tiny bone that passes vibrations through the ear .
From the stirrup , the vibrations pass to the oval window .
The ears sense the vibrations .
The oval window passes the vibrations to the cochlea .
The cochlea is filled with liquid that moves when the vibrations pass through , like the waves in water when you drop a pebble into a pond .
Tiny hair cells line the cochlea and bend when the liquid moves .
When the hair cells bend , they release neurotransmitters .
The neurotransmitters trigger nerve impulses that travel to the brain through the auditory nerve -LRB- cochlear No doubt youve been warned that listening to loud music or other loud sounds can damage your hearing .
The human ear is pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Very loud sounds can kill the tiny hair cells lining the cochlea .
The hair cells do not generally grow back once they are destroyed , so this type of hearing loss is permanent .
You can protect your hearing by avoiding loud sounds or wearing earplugs or other ear protectors .
As you read about it , trace the path of sound waves through the ear .
Assume a car horn blows in the distance .
Some of the sound waves reach your ear .
The steps below show what happens next .
When the body tips , the liquid in the semicircular canals moves up and down the sides of the canals .
Tiny hair cells line the semicircular canals .
Movement of the liquid inside the canals causes the hair cells to send nerve impulses .
The nerve impulses travel to the cerebellum in the brain along the vestibular nerve .
In response , the cerebellum sends commands to muscles to contract or relax so that the body stays balanced .
Its harder to keep your balance when you cant see .
Your eyes obviously play a role in balance .
But your ears play an even bigger role .
The gymnast pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- may not realize it , but her earsalong with her cerebellumare mostly responsible for her ability to perform on the balance beam .
The parts of the ears involved in balance are the semicircular canals .
Above , the semicircular canals are colored purple -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The canals contain liquid and are like the bottle of water pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
When the bottle tips , the water surface moves up and down the sides of the bottle .
The heart is divided into four chambers -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , or spaces : the left and right atria , and the left and right ventricles .
An atrium -LRB- singular for atria -RRB- is one of the two small , thin-walled chambers on the top of the heart where the blood first enters .
A ventricle is one of the two muscular V-shaped chambers that pump blood out of the heart .
You can remember they are called ventricles because they are shaped like a `` V. '' The atria receive the blood , and the ventricles pump the blood out of the heart .
The right atrium receives oxygen-poor blood from the body .
Blood flows through the heart in two separate loops .
After the ventricles fill with blood , they contract , and blood is pushed out of the heart .
The heart is mainly composed of cardiac muscle .
These muscle cells contract in unison , causing the heart itself to contract and generating enough force to push the blood out .
Valves -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- in the heart keep the blood flowing in one direction .
The valves do this by opening and closing in one direction only .
Blood only moves forward through the heart .
The valves stop the blood from flowing backward .
The two atrioventricular -LRB- AV -RRB- valves stop blood from moving from the ventricles to the atria .
The right side of the heart collects oxygen-poor blood from the body and pumps it into the lungs , where it releases carbon dioxide and picks up oxygen .
The two semilunar -LRB- SL -RRB- valves are found in the arteries leaving the heart , and they prevent blood from flowing back from the arteries into the ventricles .
Why does a heart beat ?
The lub-dub sound of the heartbeat is caused by the closing of the AV valves -LRB- `` lub '' -RRB- and SL valves -LRB- `` dub '' -RRB- after blood has passed through them .
The left side carries the oxygen-rich blood back from the lungs into the left side of the heart , which then pumps the oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body .
The blood delivers oxygen to the cells of the body , where it is needed for cellular respiration , and returns to the heart oxygen-poor .
To move blood through the heart , the cardiac muscle needs to contract in an organized way .
Blood first enters the atria -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
When the atria contract , blood is pushed into the ventricles .
Could bacteria survive without us ?
Bacteria can be used to make cheese from milk .
The bacteria turn the milk sugars into lactic acid .
The acid is what causes the milk to curdle to form cheese .
Bacteria are also involved in producing other foods .
Yogurt is made by using bacteria to ferment milk -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Fermenting cabbage with bacteria produces sauerkraut .
Yogurt is made from milk fermented with bacteria .
The bacteria ingest natural milk sugars and release lactic acid as a waste product , which causes proteins in the milk to form into a solid mass , which becomes the yogurt .
In the laboratory , bacteria can be changed to provide us with a variety of useful materials .
Bacteria can be used as tiny factories to produce desired chemicals and medicines .
For example , insulin , which is necessary to treat people with diabetes , can be produced using bacteria .
Through the process of transformation , the human gene for insulin is placed into bacteria .
The bacteria then use that gene to make a protein .
The protein can be separated from the bacteria and then used to treat patients .
The mass production of insulin by bacteria made this medicine much more affordable .
During transformation , bacteria can take up any DNA from the environment .
Therefore , transformation allows scientists to insert any DNA into a bacteria , potentially producing many different proteins .
Several species of bacteria , such as E. coli , are found in your digestive tract .
In fact , in your gut , bacteria cells greatly outnumber your own cells !
They break down dead materials and waste products and recycle nutrients back into the environment .
Organisms can not produce nutrients , so they must come from other sources .
We get nutrients from the food we eat ; plants get them from the soil .
How do these nutrients get into the soil ?
We also depend on bacteria to decompose our wastes in sewage treatment plants .
AIDS stands for `` acquired immune deficiency syndrome . ''
It is a condition that causes death and does not have a known cure .
AIDS usually develops 10 to 15 years after a person is first infected with HIV .
The development of AIDS can be delayed with proper medicines .
Today , individuals who acquire HIV after 50 years of age can expect to reach an average human life span .
HIV spreads through contact between an infected persons body fluids and another persons bloodstream or mucus membranes , which are found in the mouth , nose , and genital areas .
Body fluids that may contain HIV are blood , semen , vaginal fluid , and breast milk .
Donated blood is also tested to make sure it is does not contain HIV .
HIV is not transmitted by day-to-day contact in the workplace , schools , or social settings .
HIV is not transmitted through shaking hands , hugging , or a casual kiss .
The virus can spread through sexual contact or shared drug needles .
It can also spread from an infected mother to her baby during childbirth or breastfeeding .
Saliva can carry the HIV virus , but it wont spread it , unless the saliva gets into the bloodstream .
Other body fluids such as urine and sweat do not contain the virus .
HIV does not spread in any fluid in which the host cells can not survive .
Some people think they can become infected with HIV by donating blood or receiving donated blood .
The needles used to draw blood for donations are always new .
How does an HIV infection develop into AIDS ?
HIV destroys white blood cells called helper T cells .
Medications can slow down the increase of viruses in the blood .
But the medications can not remove the viruses from the body .
A vaccine against HIV could stop this disease , and such a vaccine is in development , though it could take many years before it can be given to prevent this virus .
The cells are produced by the immune system .
This is the body system that fights infections and other diseases .
HIV invades helper T cells and uses them to produce more virus particles -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Then , the virus kills the helper T cells .
As the number of viruses in the blood rises , the number of helper T cells falls .
Without helper T cells , the immune system is unable to protect the body .
The infected person can not fight infections and other diseases because they do not have T cells .
This is why people do not die from HIV .
It is also where medications to control HIV are least available .
There are currently more people infected with HIV in Africa than any other part of the world .
Well over 30 million people are living with HIV worldwide .
AIDS occurs when helper T cells fall to a very low level , making it difficult for the affected person to fight various diseases and other infections .
These people develop infections or cancers that people with a healthy immune systems can easily resist .
The first known cases of AIDS occurred in 1981 .
Since then , AIDS has led to the deaths of more than 35 million people worldwide .
The greatest number of deaths occurred in Africa .
No , your body temperature stays stable at around 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit .
Even when the temperature around you changes , your internal temperature stays the same .
This ability of the body to maintain a stable internal environment despite a changing environment is called home - ostasis .
Homeostasis doesnt just protect against temperature changes .
Other aspects of your internal environment also stay stable .
For example , your body closely regulates your fluid balance .
So how does your body maintain homeostasis ?
When glucose -LRB- sugar -RRB- levels in the blood are too high , the pancreas secretes insulin to stimulate the absorption of glucose and the conversion of glucose into glycogen , which is stored in the liver .
As blood glucose levels decrease , less insulin is produced .
When glucose levels are too low , another hormone called glucagon is produced , which causes the liver to convert glycogen back to glucose .
For additional information , see Homeostasis at .
If a raise in body temperature -LRB- stimulus -RRB- is detected -LRB- recep - tor -RRB- , a signal will cause the brain to main - tain homeostasis -LRB- response -RRB- .
Once the body temperature returns to normal , neg - ative feedback will cause the response to end .
This sequence of stimulus-receptor - signal-response is used throughout the body to maintain homeostasis .
Negative feedback is a response to a stimulus that keeps a variable close to a set value -LRB- Figure For example , your body has an internal thermostat .
During a winter day , in your house a thermostat senses the temperature in a room and responds by turning on or off the heater .
Your body acts in much the same way .
The temperature change triggers a command from the brain .
This command can cause several responses .
If you are too hot , the skin makes sweat and blood vessels near the skin surface dilate .
This response helps decrease body temperature .
Some processes in the body are regulated by positive feedback .
Positive feedback is when a response to an event increases the likelihood of the event to continue .
As the baby drinks her mothers milk , the hormone prolactin , a chemical signal , is released .
The more the baby suckles , the more prolactin is released , which causes more milk to be produced .
Other examples of positive feedback include contractions during childbirth .
When constrictions in the uterus push a baby into the birth canal , additional contractions occur .
Carbon is one of the most common elements found in living organisms .
Chains of carbon molecules form the backbones of many organic molecules , such as carbohydrates , proteins , and lipids .
This carbon dioxide is generated through the process of cellular respiration , which has the reverse chemical reaction as photosynthesis .
That means when our cells burn food -LRB- glucose -RRB- for energy , carbon dioxide is released .
We , like all animals , exhale this carbon dioxide and return it back to the atmosphere .
Also , carbon is released to the atmosphere as an organism dies and decomposes .
Cellular respiration and photosynthesis can be described as a cycle , as one uses carbon dioxide -LRB- and water -RRB- and makes oxygen -LRB- and glucose -RRB- , and the other uses oxygen -LRB- and glucose -RRB- and makes carbon dioxide -LRB- and water -RRB- .
Carbon is also returned to the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels and decomposition of organic matter .
The cycling of carbon occurs through the carbon cycle .
Living organisms can not make their own carbon , so how is carbon incorporated into living organisms ?
Recall that plants and other producers capture the carbon dioxide and convert it to glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- through the process of photosynthesis .
Then as animals eat plants or other animals , they gain the carbon from those organisms .
How does this carbon in living things end up back in the atmosphere ?
Millions of years ago , there were so many dead plants and animals that they could not completely decompose before they were buried .
Carbon dioxide is known as a greenhouse gas , since it lets in light energy but does not let heat escape , much like the panes of a greenhouse .
The increase of greenhouse gasses in the atmosphere is contributing to a global rise in Earths temperature , known as global warming or global climate change .
These dead plants and animals are organic matter made out of cells full of carbon-containing organic compounds -LRB- carbohydrates , lipids , proteins and nucleic acids -RRB- .
When humans dig up and use fossil fuels , we have an impact on the carbon cycle -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
This carbon is not recycled until it is used by humans .
The burning of fossil fuels releases more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere than is used by photosynthesis .
So , there is more carbon dioxide entering the atmosphere than is coming out of it .
These include issues associated with climate change , pollution , and over-population .
Another major cause of extinction is global warming , which is also known as global climate change .
During the past century , the Earths average temperature has risen by almost 1C -LRB- about 1.3 F -RRB- .
You may not think that is significant , but to organisms that live in the wild and are constantly adapting to their environments , any climate change can be hazardous .
Recall that burning fossil fuels releases gasses into the atmosphere that warm the Earth .
Our increased use of fossil fuels , such as coal and oil , is changing the Earths climate .
Any long-term change in the climate can destroy the habitat of a species .
For example , if the seas increase in temperature , even briefly , it may be too warm for certain types of fish to reproduce .
Pollution adds chemicals , noise , heat , or even light to an environment .
About 58,000 gallons of oil spilled from a South Korea-bound container ship when it struck a tower supporting the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge in dense fog in November , 2007 .
Finally , soil contamination can also result in extinction .
Soil contamination can come from toxic industrial and municipal wastes -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- , salts from irrigation , and pesticides from agriculture .
These all degrade the soil as well .
As soil is the foundation of terrestrial ecosystems , this can result in extinction .
For example , the pesticide DDT nearly eliminated the peregrine falcon in some parts of the world .
This pesticide caused falcons to lay eggs with thinner shells .
DDT was then banned in the U.S. and peregrine falcon populations have recovered .
Water pollution threatens vital freshwater and marine resources throughout the world -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Specifically , industrial and agricultural chemicals , waste , and acid rain threaten water .
The human population passed the 7 billion mark in October of 2011 , and will pass 8 and 9 billion probably before the middle of the century .
All these people will need resources such as places to live , food to eat , and water to drink , and they will use energy and create waste .
Essentially , human population growth can effect all other causes of extinction .
For example , more people on the Earth means more people contributing to global warming and pollution .
More people also means more clearing of land for agriculture and development .
Recall that development by humans often causes habitats to be destroyed .
This destruction can force species to go extinct , or move somewhere else .
Nutrients in the foods you eat are needed by the cells of your body .
How do the nutrients in foods get to your body cells ?
This drawing shows the major organs of the digestive system .
Digestion is the process of breaking down food into nutrients .
In mechanical digestion , large chunks of food are broken down into small pieces .
Mechanical digestion begins in the mouth and involves physical processes , such as chewing .
This process continues in the stomach as the food is mixed with digestive juices .
What organs and processes break down the foods and make the nutrients available to cells ?
In chemical digestion , large food molecules are broken down into small nutrient molecules .
This is a chemical process which also begins in the mouth as saliva begins to break down food and continues in the stomach as stomach enzymes further digest the food .
Absorption is the process that allows substances you eat to be taken up by the blood .
After food is broken down into small nutrient molecules , the molecules are absorbed by the blood .
After absorption , the nutrient molecules travel in the bloodstream to cells throughout the body .
This happens mostly in the small intestine .
Some substances in food can not be broken down into nutrients .
They remain behind in the digestive system after the nutrients are absorbed .
The process of passing solid food waste out of the body is called elimination .
The digestive system is mainly one long tube from the mouth to the anus , known as the gastrointestinal tract -LRB- GI tract -RRB- .
The main organs of the digestive system include the esophagus , stomach and the intestine , and are pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The intestine is divided into the small and large intestine .
The technologies developed during this effort , and since the completion of this project , will reduce the cost of sequencing a persons genome .
This may eventually allow many people to sequence their individual genome .
Analysis of your own genome could determine if you are at risk for specific diseases .
To complete the Human Genome Project , all 23 pairs of chromosomes in the human body were sequenced .
Each chromo - some contains thousands of genes .
This is a karyotype , a visual representation of an individuals chromosomes lined up by size .
The video Our Molecular Selves discusses the human genome , and is available at or .
The Human Genome Project -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- was an international effort to sequence all 3 billion bases that make up our DNA and to identify within this code more than 20,000 human genes .
Scientists also completed a chromosome map , identifying where the genes are located on each of the chromosomes .
The Human Genome Project was completed in 2003 .
Though the Human Genome Project is finished , analysis of the data will continue for many years .
Exciting applications of the Human Genome Project include the following : The genetic basis for many diseases can be more easily determined .
How quickly is the human population growing ?
If we look at worldwide human population growth from 10,000 BCE through today , our growth looks like exponential growth .
It increased very slowly at first , but later grew faster and faster as the population increased in size -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
And recently , the human population has increased at a faster pace than ever before .
It has taken only 12 years for the worlds population to increase from six billion to seven billion .
Considering that in the year 1804 , there were just one billion people , and in 1927 , there were just two billion people -LRB- thats 123 years to increase from 1 to 2 billion -RRB- , the recent increase in the human population growth rate is characteristic of exponential growth .
On the level of a country , the history of human population growth can be divided into five stages , as described in Table 1.1 .
The United Nations and the U.S. Census Bureau predict that by 2050 , the Earth will be populated by 9.4 billion people .
Other estimates predict 10 to 11 billion .
Some countries have very high birth rates , in some countries the growth rate has stabilized , and in some countries the growth rate is in decline .
Significant drop in death rate , resulting in exponential growth .
This occurred in 18th - and 19th-century Eu - rope .
Population size continues to grow .
Birth rates equal death rates and populations become stable .
There are two different beliefs about what type of growth the human population will undergo in the future : 1 .
Neo-Malthusians believe that human population growth can not continue without destroying the environment , and maybe humans themselves .
These problems may cause the population of humans to crash .
If these issues are not controlled , could the human population go extinct ?
Cornucopians believe that the Earth can give humans a limitless amount of resources .
They also believe that technology can solve problems caused by limited resources , such as lack of food .
The Cornucopians believe that a larger population is good for technology and innovation .
The 5-stage model above predicts that when all countries are industrialized , the human population will eventually level out .
But many scientists and other Neo-Malthusians believe that humans have already gone over the Earths carrying capacity .
That means , we may have already reached the maximum population size that can be supported , without destroying our resources and habitat .
If this is true , then human overpopulation will lead to a lack of food and other resources .
The adult human skeleton has 206 bones , some of which are named below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Bones are made up of living tissue .
Cartilage , a dense connective tissue , is found at the end of bones and is made of tough protein fibers .
Cartilage creates smooth surfaces for the movement of bones that are next to each other , like the bones of the knee .
Ligaments are made of tough protein fibers and connect bones to each other .
Your bones , cartilage , and ligaments make up your skeletal system .
Your skeletal system gives shape and form to your body , but it also plays other important roles .
The main functions of the skeletal system include : The skeletal system is made up of bones , cartilage , and ligaments .
For example , the skull surrounds the brain to protect it from injury .
Bones work together with muscles to move the body .
What bones protect the heart and lungs ?
The skeleton supports the body against the pull of gravity , meaning you dont fall over when you stand up .
The large bones of the lower limbs support the rest of the body when standing .
The skeleton supports and protects the soft organs of the body .
Bones come in many different shapes and sizes , but they are all made of the same materials .
Bones are organs , and recall that organs are made up of two or more types of tissues .
Compact bone makes up the dense outer layer of bones .
Spongy bone is found at the center of the bone and is lighter and more porous than compact bone .
Bones look tough , shiny , and white because they are covered by a layer called the periosteum .
Many bones also contain a soft connective tissue called bone marrow in the pores of the spongy bone .
Bone marrow is where blood cells are made .
Bones are made up of different types of tissues .
Early in human development , the skeleton consists of only cartilage and other connective tissues .
This thickening occurs in response to strain from increased muscle activity and from weight-lifting exercises .
As the fetus develops , hard bone begins to replace the cartilage , and the skeleton begins to harden .
Not all of the cartilage , however , is replaced by bone .
Cartilage remains in many places in your body , including your joints , your rib cage , your ears , and the tip of your nose .
A baby is born with zones of cartilage in its bones that allow growth of the bones .
These areas , called growth plates , allow the bones to grow longer as the child grows .
By the time the child reaches an age of about 18 to 25 years , all of the cartilage in the growth plate has been replaced by bone .
This stops the bone from growing any longer .
Even though bones stop growing in length in early adulthood , they can continue to increase in thickness throughout life .
Recall that air pollution is due to chemical substances and particles released into the air mainly by human actions .
When most people think of air pollution , they think of the pollution outdoors .
Formaldehyde , a toxic gas emitted from building materials , such as carpeting and plywood .
Volatile organic compounds -LRB- VOCs -RRB- , which are given off by paint and solvents as they dry .
Secondhand smoke , which comes from breathing the smoke release from tobacco products .
Secondhand smoke is also the smoke exhaled by a cigarette smoker .
Carbon monoxide -LRB- CO -RRB- , a toxic gas released by burning fossil fuels .
Dry cleaning fluids , such as tetrachloroethylene , which can be released from clothing days after dry cleaning .
Asbestos is a very dangerous material , and it was used in many buildings -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Asbestos can cause cancer and other lung diseases .
The use of asbestos is not allowed today .
The use of asbestos in industry and do - mestic environments in the past , as in the asbestos-covered pipes in the oil-refining plant pictured here , has left a potentially very dangerous material in many busi - nesses .
Biological sources of air pollution are also found indoors .
Your home or school classroom probably doesnt get much fresh air .
Air conditioning systems that can incubate certain bacteria and mold .
Sealing up your home reduces heating and cooling costs .
But this also causes air pollution to stay trapped indoors .
And people today usually spend a majority of their time indoors .
So exposure to indoor air pollution can become a significant health risk .
Indoor air pollutants include both chemical and biological pollutants .
Some tips to decrease your exposure to indoor air pollution include : Using less toxic chemicals when possible .
Limiting your exposure to pesticides and cleaning fluids by keeping them in a garage or shed .
When using toxic chemicals , allowing fresh air to circulate through open windows and doors .
The first year after birth is called infancy .
Infancy is a period when the baby grows very fast .
Between one and three years of age , a child is called a toddler .
A toddler learns many new words .
The child even starts putting together words in simple sentences .
Motor skills also develop quickly during this stage .
By age three , most children can run and climb steps .
During infancy , the baby doubles in length and triples in weight .
The arms and legs get longer compared to the trunk .
Most also learn how to play games and sports -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
By age six , children start losing their baby teeth .
Their permanent teeth begin coming in to replace them .
Other important changes also happen during infancy : The babys teeth start to come in , usually at about six months of age -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The baby starts smiling , paying attention to other people , and grabbing toys .
By the end of the first year , the baby is starting to say a few words , such as mama and dada .
Childhood begins after the babys first birthday and continues until the teen years .
There are numerous milestones that occur during the first few years of childhood .
These include the use of language , walking and running , understanding simple concepts , pretend play , the development of fine motor skills , the development of independence , Children develop better motor skills as they get older .
When Darwin returned to England five years later , in 1836 , at the end of his voyage , he did not rush to announce his discoveries .
Unlike other naturalists before him , Darwin did not want to present any ideas unless he had strong evidence supporting them .
However , Darwin differed with Lamarck on several key points .
Lamarck proposed that traits acquired during ones lifetime could be passed to the next generation .
Darwin did not agree with this .
The findings of Charles Lyell , a well-known geologist , also influenced Darwin .
Lyells writings taught Darwin about geology , paleontology , and the changing Earth .
Lyells findings suggested the Earth must be much older than 6,000 years .
And the evolution of life , as Darwin was developing his ideas , would definitely take much longer than just 6,000 years .
During the Voyage of the Beagle , Darwin observed fossils of sea life high up in the mountains .
Instead , once Darwin returned to England , he spent over twenty years examining specimens , talking with other scientists and collecting more information before he presented his theories .
Darwin , using the readings of Lyell , took this as evidence of a constantly changing Earth .
After the Voyage of the Beagle , another naturalist , Alfred Russel Wallace -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , developed a similar theory of evolution by natural selection .
Wallace toured South America and made similar observations to Darwins .
Darwin and Wallace presented their theories and evidence in public together .
Due to the large number of observations and conclusions he made , Darwin is mostly credited and associated with this theory .
Alfred Wallace developed a similar theory of evolution by natural selection .
Imagine pulling together material from all these different people , adding his own findings , and turning it all into his theory .
Imag - ine the torment Darwin must have endured during this time , knowing the skepticism that would follow the release of his findings .
Some of Darwins ideas conflicted with widely held beliefs , including those from religious leaders .
But , upon his death , Darwin was given one of the highest honors in England .
Darwin is buried in Westminster Abbey , the final resting place of many of Englands kings and queens .
At that time , many people believed that organisms never change and never go extinct , and that the world was only about 6,000 years old , always existing in the same way , never changing .
These beliefs delayed Darwin in presenting his findings .
How did Darwin come up with his theories ?
Charles Darwin was influenced by the ideas of several people .
Before the voyage of the Beagle , Jean-Baptiste Lamarck proposed the idea that species change over time .
Injuries to the central nervous system may damage tissues of the brain or spinal cord .
If an injury is severe , it may cause permanent disability or even death .
Brain and spinal cord injuries most commonly occur because of car crashes or sports accidents .
Brain injuries can range from mild to extremely severe , but even mild injuries need medical attention .
Brain injuries can result from falls , car accidents , violence , sports injuries , and war and combat .
But repeated concussions may lead to lasting problems .
For this reason , concussions are treated very seriously among athletes and in professional sports .
You can see an animation of how a concussion occurs by visiting A person with a serious brain injury usually suffers permanent brain damage .
These brain injuries usually occur when an external mechanical force , such as a violent blow or jolt to the head or body , causes brain dysfunction .
An object penetrating the skull , such as a bullet or a shattered piece of the skull , also can cause traumatic brain injury .
As a result , the person may have trouble talking or controlling body movements .
Symptoms depend on what part of the brain was injured .
Serious brain injuries can also cause personality changes and problems with mental abilities such as memory .
Medicines , counseling , and other treatments may help people with serious brain injuries recover from , or at least learn to cope with , their disabilities .
Symptoms of severe brain injuries include the loss of consciousness from several minutes to hours , profound confusion , slurred speech , the inability to awaken from sleep , seizures , loss of coordination , persistent headache or headache that worsens .
Most concussions in young people occur when they are playing sports , especially contact sports like football .
Other sports , like soccer , boxing , baseball , lacrosse , skateboarding , and hockey can also result in concussions .
A concussion normally heals on its own in a few days .
A single concussion is unlikely to cause permanent damage .
This injury often causes permanent changes in strength , sensation and other body functions below the site of the injury .
Some people recover from spinal cord injuries .
But many people are paralyzed for life .
For example , scientists are trying to discover ways to regrow damaged spinal cord neurons .
If you suspect that someone has a back or neck injury : dont move the injured person as permanent paralysis and other serious complications may result , call 911 or your local emergency medical assistance number , keep the person very still , place heavy towels on both sides of the neck or hold the head and neck to prevent them from moving , until emergency care arrives , provide basic first aid , such as stopping any bleeding and making the person comfortable , without moving the head or neck .
Former `` man of steel '' Superman star Christopher Reeve -LRB- September 25 , 1952 October 10 , 2004 -RRB- was paralyzed from the neck down in a fall from a horse .
The injury crushed his spinal cord so his brain could no longer communicate with his body .
Spinal cord injuries make it difficult for messages to travel between the brain and body .
This is called paralysis .
Whether paralysis occursand what parts of the body are affected if it doesdepends on the location and seriousness of the injury .
Quadriplegia means your arms , hands , trunk , legs and pelvic organs are all affected by your spinal cord injury .
Paraplegia means the paralysis affects all or part of the trunk , legs and pelvic organs .
These people can still use their arms and hands .
But there are other features that are shared by this class of organisms .
Logically , this makes sense , in that the vertebral column would evolve first , with the more complex jaw bones evolving later .
The early jawless fish are thought to have relied on filter feeding to capture their food , and most likely would have sucked water and debris from the seafloor into their mouth , releasing water and waste out of their gills .
As other sea life evolved , these jawless fish began to feed on other fish species , and are now considered a pest in their habitat .
Jawless fish are missing the following parts : 1 .
These organs take dissolved oxygen from water .
A cartilaginous skeleton , a skeleton made of a flexible rubber-like supportive material called cartilage .
This is similar to the skeleton of cartilaginous fish , which includes sharks and rays .
This means that their internal temperature depends on the temperature of their envi - ronment .
Recall a notochord is a support rod that runs along the back of the fish .
Most scientists agree that the jawless fish are part of the the superclass Agnatha .
Although hagfish belong to the subphylum Vertebrata , they do not technically have vertebrae -LRB- though they do have a skull -RRB- , whereas lampreys do have vertebrae .
For this reason , scientists still disagree on the classification of jawless fish .
You can help keep your bones and skeletal system healthy by eating well and getting enough exercise .
Weight - bearing exercises help keep bones strong .
Weight-bearing exercises and activities work against gravity .
Such activities include basketball , tennis , gymnastics , karate , running , and walking .
When the body is exercised regularly by performing weight-bearing activity , bones respond by adding more bone cells to increase their bone density .
Did you know that what you eat as a teenager can affect how healthy your skeletal system will be in 30 , 40 , and even 50 years ?
It is recommended that teenagers get 1300 mg of calcium every day .
of milk provides about 300 mg of calcium , or about 30 % of the daily requirement .
Other sources of calcium are pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Getting enough calcium in your daily diet is important for good bone health .
Your skin makes vitamin D when exposed to sunlight .
Pigments in the skin act like a filter that can prevent the skin from making vitamin D . As a result , people with darker skin need more time in the sun than people with lighter skin to make the same amount of vitamin D . You can also get vitamin D from foods .
Your bones need calcium to grow properly .
Fish is naturally rich in vitamin D . In the United States , vitamin D is added to other foods , including milk , soy milk , and breakfast cereals .
Teenagers are recommended to get 5 micrograms -LRB- 200 IU -RRB- of vitamin D every day .
A 3 12 - ounce portion of cooked salmon provides 360 IU of vitamin D . A 8-ounce glass of milk is fortified with about 100 IU of vitamin D.
If you do not get enough calcium in your diet as a teenager , your bones may become weak and break easily later in life .
Osteoporosis is a disease in which bones lose mass and become more fragile than they should be .
Osteoporosis also makes bones more likely to break .
Two of the easiest ways to prevent osteoporosis are eating a healthy diet that has the right amount of calcium and vitamin D and to do some sort of weight-bearing exercise every day .
Foods that are a good source of calcium include milk , yogurt , and cheese .
Non-dairy sources of calcium include Chinese cabbage , kale , and broccoli .
Many fruit juices , fruit drinks , tofu , and cereals have calcium added to them .
Moving the broken pieces together will help keep the bone from moving and give the body a chance to repair the break .
Below , a broken ulna has been repaired with pins -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The upper part of the ulna , just above the elbow joint , is broken , as you can see in the X-ray to the left .
The x-ray to the right was taken after a surgeon inserted a system of pins and wires across the fracture to bring the two pieces of the ulna into close proximity .
Bending stress is what causes a pencil to break if you bend it too far .
Soon after a fracture , the body begins to repair the break .
The area becomes swollen and sore .
Within a few days , bone cells travel to the break site and begin to rebuild the bone .
Sometimes the body needs extra help in repairing a broken bone .
Osteoarthritis occurs when the cartilage at the ends of the bones breaks down .
The break down of the cartilage leads to pain and stiffness in the joint .
Decreased movement of the joint because of the pain may lead to weakening of the muscles that normally move the joint , and the ligaments surrounding the joint may become loose .
It has many contributing factors , including aging , sport injuries , fractures , and obesity .
Ligaments can get injured when a joint gets twisted or bends too far .
The protein fibers that make up a ligament can get strained or torn , causing swelling and pain .
Injuries to ligaments are called sprains .
Wearing the correct safety equipment when performing activities that require such equipment can help prevent many common injuries .
For example , wearing a bicycle helmet can help prevent a skull injury if you fall .
Warming up and cooling down properly can help prevent ligament and muscle injuries .
Stretching before and after activity also helps prevent injuries .
Your skin is your largest organ and constantly protects you from infections , so keeping your skin healthy is a good idea .
Vitamin D is made in the skin when it is exposed to sunlight .
UV radiation damages the genetic material -LRB- DNA -RRB- of skin cells .
This damage can cause the skin cells to grow out of control and form a tumor .
Sunburn is caused by overexposure to UV rays .
Getting sunburned as a child or a teen , especially sunburn that causes blistering , increases the risk of developing skin cancer later in life .
A sunburn is a burn to the skin that is caused by overexposure to UV radiation from the suns rays or tanning beds .
Light-skinned people , like the man pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , get sunburned more quickly than people with darker skin .
This is because pigments -LRB- melanin -RRB- in the skin act as a natural sunblock that help to protect the body from UV radiation .
With over one million new cases each year , skin cancer , which is cancer that forms in the tissues of the skin , is the most common form of human cancer .
Children and teens who have been sunburned are at a greater risk of developing skin cancer later in life .
Long-term exposure to UV radiation is the leading cause of skin cancer .
About 90 percent of skin cancers are linked to sun exposure .
Bathing every day helps to keep your skin clean and healthy .
Also , you know that taking a bath or shower helps prevent body odor .
During the day , sweat , oil , dirt , dust , and dead skin cells can build up on the skin surface .
If not washed away , the mix of these materials can encourage the excess growth of bacteria .
These bacteria feed on these substances and cause a smell that is commonly called body odor .
Conditions that irritate , clog or inflame your skin can cause symptoms such as redness , swelling , burning and itching .
Allergies , irritants , your genetic background and certain diseases and immune system problems can cause numerous skin conditions .
Cold Sores Cold sores are red , fluid-filled blisters that appear near the mouth or on other areas of the face , usually caused by herpes simplex virus type 1 .
Even after sores have healed , the virus remains in your body , and new cold sores can appear at any time .
This is not to be confused with genital herpes , which is caused by herpes simplex virus type 2 .
Canker sores are not contagious and usually heal on their own within a week or two .
Causes of canker sores include a viral infection , stress , hormonal fluctuations , food allergies , immune system problems , or mouth injuries .
Acne Your skin has tiny holes called pores that that can become blocked by oil , bacteria , dead skin and dirt .
Acne is a skin condition that causes pimples , and is one of the more common skin problem among teenagers .
A diet high in refined sugars or carbohydrates such as bread and chips can also lead to acne .
Each pore on your skin is the opening to a follicle , which is made of a hair and sebaceous gland that releases sebum .
Acne may result from too much sebum produced by the follicle , dead skin cells accumulating in the pore , or bacteria built up in the pore .
Cleaning your skin daily with a mild soap to remove excess oil and dirt can help prevent acne .
Not only will you avoid the injury that drugs themselves can cause , but you will also be less likely to get involved in other risky behaviors that could harm your nervous system .
Another way to keep the nervous system healthy is to eat a variety of healthy foods .
Some foods that are good sources for these minerals and vitamins include milk , whole grains , beef steak , and kidney beans -LRB- shown in Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Your brain also needs healthy fats like those in nuts and fish .
These fats help build new connections between nerves and brain cells .
These fats may improve memory and increase learning and intelligence .
This helps prevent dehydration , which can cause confusion and memory problems .
Your nervous system contains what is probably the most important part of your body , which , of course , is your brain .
Your brain requires plenty of rest so it can strengthen circuits that help with memory .
A good nights sleep will help keep your brain functioning at its best .
These foods are sources of nutrients needed for a healthy nervous system .
Regular exercise makes your heart more efficient at pumping blood to your brain .
As a result , your brain gets more oxygen , which it needs to function normally .
The saying use it or lose it applies to your brain as well as your body .
This means that mental activity , not just physical activity , is important for nervous system health .
You can also choose to practice safe behaviors to protect your nervous system from injury .
To keep your nervous system safe , choose to : Bicycle helmets help protect from head injuries .
Making healthy choices like this can help prevent nervous system injuries that could cause lifelong disability .
Furthermore , make sure to exercise your nervous system on a daily basis .
The simple act of writing requires that you use all the major components of your motor and sensory pathways .
These include a number of different sensory receptors , peripheral nerves , synaptic connections within your spinal cord , major tracts within your spinal cord , and nerve tissue throughout your brain .
All these components need to be utilized with great precision and coordination to produce neatly written words .
Spend a few minutes each day writing on paper as neatly as you can .
This takes a lot more effort on the part of the nervous system than typing on a keyboard , as typing on a keyboard doesnt require as much fine motor control as writing on paper .
Drawing with precision also requires use of all the major components of the sensory and motor divisions of the nervous system .
It works together with the nerves and spinal cord to send the signals that make your body move .
Your nervous system lets you do things like run , jump , play sports , and do your homework .
The kidneys -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- are important organs in maintaining homeostasis , the ability of the body to maintain a stable internal environment despite a changing environment .
Kidneys perform a number of homeostatic functions .
Structures of the kidney ; fluid leaks from the capillaries and into the nephrons where the fluid forms urine then moves to the ureter and on to the bladder .
Nitrogen-containing wastes , together with water and other wastes , form the urine as it passes through the nephrons and the kidney .
The fluid within nephrons is carried out into a larger tube in the kidney called a ureter , which carries it to the bladder -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The kidneys never stop filtering waste products from the blood , so they are always producing urine .
Your body loses water through sweating , breathing , and urination .
The water and other fluids you drink every day help to replace the lost water .
This water ends up circulating in the blood because blood plasma is mostly water .
The kidneys remove urea and other wastes from the blood through tiny filtering units called nephrons .
Nephrons -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- are tiny , tube-shaped structures found inside each kidney .
Each nephron collects a small amount of fluid and waste from a small group of capillaries .
Blood flows into the kidney through the renal artery .
The blood that leaves the kidney in the renal vein has much less waste than the blood that entered the kidney .
The urine is collected in the ureters and is moved to the urinary bladder , where it is stored .
In a 24-hour period , nephrons filter 180 liters of fluid , and 1.5 liters of the fluid is released as urine .
Urine enters the bladder through the ureters .
The stretchy walls allow the bladder to hold a large amount of urine .
The bladder can hold about 1 12 to 2 21 cups of urine but may also hold more if the urine can not be released immediately .
The renal artery connects to capillaries inside the kidney .
Urination is the process of releasing urine from the body .
Urine leaves the body through the urethra .
As the bladder first fills with urine , you may notice a feeling that you need to urinate .
The urge to urinate becomes stronger as the bladder continues to fill up .
The fluid collects in the nephron tubules and moves to the bladder through the ureter .
Capillaries and nephrons lie very close to each other in the kidney .
The blood pressure within the capillaries causes water , salts , sugars , and urea to leave the capillaries and move into the nephron .
The water and salts move along through the tube-shaped nephron to a lower part of the nephron .
The fluid that remains in the nephron at this point is called urine .
The filtering action of the kidneys is controlled by the pituitary gland .
The pituitary gland is about the size of a pea and is found below the brain -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
When a person drinks a lot of water , then there will be a lot of water in the blood .
The pituitary gland will then release a lower amount of ADH into the blood .
This means less water will be reabsorbed by the blood .
The kidneys then produce a large volume of urine .
The pituitary gland releases hormones that help the kidneys to filter water from the blood .
The movement of water back into blood is controlled by a hormone called antidiuretic hormone -LRB- ADH -RRB- .
ADH is one of the hormones released from the pituitary gland in the brain .
One of the most important roles of ADH is to control the bodys ability to hold onto water .
If a person does not drink enough water , ADH is released .
It causes the blood to reabsorb water from the kidneys .
The inner compartments inside the thylakoids are called the thylakoid space -LRB- or lumen -RRB- .
The interior space that surrounds the thylakoids is filled with a fluid called stroma .
This is where carbon dioxide is used to produce glucose , the second part of photosynthesis .
Photosynthesis occurs in two stages .
During the first stage , the energy from sunlight is absorbed by the chloroplast .
Water is used , and oxygen is produced during this part of the process .
During the second stage , carbon dioxide is used , and glucose is produced .
Chloroplasts contain stacks of thylakoids , which are flattened sacs of membrane .
Energy from sunlight is absorbed by the pigment chlorophyll in the thylakoid membrane .
What goes into the plant cell to start photosynthesis ?
These three components must meet in the chloroplast of the leaf cell for photosynthesis to occur .
How do these three components get to the cells in the leaf ?
Chlorophyll is the green pigment in leaves that captures energy from the sun .
The veins in a plant carry water from the roots to the leaves .
What is produced by the plant cell during photosynthesis ?
This means they are produced at the end of photosynthesis .
Glucose , the food of plants , can be used to store energy in the form of large carbohydrate molecules .
Glucose is a simple sugar molecule which can be combined with other glucose molecules to form large carbohydrates , such as starch .
As you know , animals need oxygen to live .
This produces 1 molecule of glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- and 6 molecules of oxygen Stomata are special pores that allow gasses to enter and exit the leaf .
Using chemical symbols , the equation is represented as follows : 6CO2 + 6H2 O C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 .
Though this equation may not seem that complicated , photosynthesis is a series of chemical reactions divided into two stages , the light reactions and the Calvin cycle -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Photosynthesis begins with the light reactions .
The energy is then temporarily transferred to two molecules , ATP and NADPH , which are used in the second stage of photosynthesis .
ATP and NADPH are generated by two electron transport chains .
During the light reactions , water is used and oxygen is produced .
These reactions can only occur during daylight as the process needs sunlight to begin .
This process occurs in a continuous cycle , named after its discover , Melvin Calvin .
The Calvin cycle uses CO2 and the energy temporarily stored in ATP and NADPH to make the sugar glucose .
In exponential growth -LRB- J-shaped curve , curve A : Figure 1.1 -RRB- , as the population size increases , the growth rate also increases .
Curve A shows exponential growth .
Limiting factors are resources or other factors in the environment that can lower the population growth rate .
Limiting factors can lower birth rates , increase death rates , or lead to emigration .
When organisms face limiting factors , they show logistic growth -LRB- S-shaped curve , curve B : Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Compe - tition for resources like food and space cause the growth rate to stop increasing , so the population levels off .
The carrying capacity -LRB- K -RRB- is the maximum population size that can be supported in a particular area without destroying the habitat .
Limiting factors determine the carrying capacity of a population .
If there are 12 hamburgers at a lunch table and 24 people sit down at a lunch table , will everyone be able to eat ?
At first , maybe you will split hamburgers in half , but if more and more people keep coming to sit at the lunch table , you will not be able to feed everyone .
This will cause the population growth rate to decrease .
When the population decreases to a certain level where every individual can get enough food and other resources , and the birth and death rates become stable , the population has leveled off at its carrying capacity .
But in nature , organisms that can not get food will die or find a new place to live .
When there is plenty of food and other resources , organisms can easily reproduce , so the birth rate is high .
As the population increases , the food supply , or the supply of another necessary resource , may decrease .
When necessary resources , such as food , decrease , some individuals will die .
Overall , the population can not reproduce at the same rate , so the birth rates drop .
Other limiting factors include light , water , nutrients or minerals , oxygen , the ability of an ecosystem to recycle nutrients and/or waste , disease and/or parasites , temperature , space , and predation .
Can you think of some other factors that limit populations ?
Whereas most plants like rain , an individual cactus-like Agave americana plant actually likes to grow when it is dry .
Rainfall limits reproduction of this plant which , in turn , limits growth rate .
Human activities can also limit the growth of populations .
Such activities include use of pesticides , such as DDT , use of herbicides , and habitat destruction .
The male reproductive organs include the penis , testes , and epididymis -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The figure also shows other parts of the male reproductive system .
The testes are found inside of the scrotum .
The scrotum is a sac that hangs down outside the body .
The testes , being in the scrotum outside the body , allow the temperature of the sperm to be maintained at a few degrees lower than body temperature .
The epididymis is where sperm grow larger and mature .
The epididymis also stores sperm until they leave the body .
Other parts of the male reproductive system include the vas deferens and the prostate gland .
Both of these structures are pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The vas deferens is a tube that carries sperm from the epididymis to the urethra .
The prostate gland secretes a fluid that mixes with sperm to help form semen .
Semen is a `` milky '' liquid that carries sperm through the urethra and out of the body .
In addition to sperm cells , semen contains sugars -LRB- fructose -RRB- which provide energy to the sperm cells , and enzymes and other substances which help the sperm survive .
The urethra is a tube that carries urine out of the body .
The urethra also carries sperm out of the body .
This drawing shows the organs of the male reproductive system .
Releasing testosterone into the body .
When a male gamete meets a female gamete , they can form a new organism .
Sperm form when certain cells in the male reproductive system divide by meiosis , resulting in cells with half the amount of DNA as a regular `` body '' cell .
When males grow older , they produce millions of sperm each day .
The male reproductive system also maintains and transports and delivers sperm and a protective fluid , known as semen .
Hormones are chemicals that control many body processes .
Testosterone has two major roles : During the teen years , testosterone causes the reproductive organs to mature .
For example , it causes hair to grow on the face and allows for muscle growth .
During adulthood , testosterone helps a man to produce sperm .
When a hormone is released into the body , we say it is `` secreted . ''
Testosterone is secreted by males , but it is not the only sex hormone that males secrete .
Males also secrete small amounts of estrogen .
Even though estrogen is the main female sex hormone , scientists think that estrogen is needed for normal sperm production in males .
Like other mammals , humans have a body system that controls reproduction .
The menstrual cycle is a series of changes in the reproductive system of mature females that repeats every month .
While the egg and follicle are developing in the ovary , tissues are building up inside the uterus , the reproductive organ where the baby would develop .
If the egg is fertilized , the egg makes its way through the fallopian tube into the uterus , where it imbeds into the thick lining .
When this occurs , the monthly cycle stops .
The monthly cycle does not resume until the pregnancy is over .
If a sperm does not enter an egg , the lining of the uterus breaks down .
The uterus develops a thick lining covered in tiny blood vessels .
Some women feel discomfort during this process .
Some people think that the average length of a menstrual period is the same as the normal length .
In fact , menstrual periods can vary from 1 to 8 days in length .
This prepares the uterus to receive an egg that could develop into a child -LRB- a fertilized egg -RRB- .
Ovulation , the release of an egg from the ovary , occurs at about the midpoint of the cycle .
The egg is swept into the fallopian tube .
As sperm can only survive in the fallopian tube for up to a few days , fertilization can only occur within those few days post-ovulation .
Before microscopes were invented in 1595 , the smallest things you could see on yourself were the tiny lines in your skin .
Over four hundred years ago , two Dutch spectacle makers , Zaccharias Janssen and his son Hans , were experimenting with several lenses in a tube .
They discovered that nearby objects appeared greatly enlarged , or magnified .
In one of his early experiments , van Leeuwenhoek took a sample of scum from his own teeth and used his microscope to discover bacteria , the smallest living organism on the planet .
Using microscopes , van Leeuwenhoek also discovered one-celled protists and sperm cells .
In 1665 , Robert Hooke , an English natural scientist , used a microscope to zoom in on a piece of cork - the stuff that makes up the stoppers in wine bottles , which is made from tree bark .
This finding eventually led to the development of the theory that all living things are made of cells .
Without microscopes , this discovery would not have been possible , and the cell theory would not have been developed .
Hookes discovery of the cell set the stage for other scientists to discover other types of organisms .
After Hooke , the `` father of microscopy , '' Dutch scientist Antoine van Leeuwenhoek -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- taught himself to make one of the first microscopes .
Some modern microscopes use light , as Hookes and van Leeuwenhoeks did .
Others may use electron beams or sound waves .
Scanning electron microscopes -LRB- SEM -RRB- allow scientists to find the shape and surface texture of extremely small objects , including a paperclip , a bedbug , or even an atom .
These microscopes slide a beam of electrons across the surface of a specimen , producing detailed maps of the surface of objects .
Magnification in a SEM can be controlled over a range from about 10 to 500,000 times .
Scanning acoustic microscopes use sound waves to scan a specimen .
Researchers now use these four types of microscopes : 1 .
Light microscopes allow biologists to see small details of a specimen .
Most of the microscopes used in schools and laboratories are light microscopes .
Light microscopes use lenses , typically made of glass or plastic , to focus light either into the eye , a camera , or some other light detector .
The most powerful light microscopes can make images up to 2,000 times larger .
Transmission electron microscopes -LRB- TEM -RRB- focus a beam of electrons through an object and can make an image up to two million times bigger , with a very clear image .
The shells you find are most likely left by organisms in the phylum Mollusca .
On the beach , you can find the shells of many different mollusks -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , including clams , mussels , scallops , oysters , and snails .
The Mollusks body is often divided into different parts -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- : On the beach , you can find a wide variety of mollusk shells .
A complete digestive tract that begins at the mouth and runs to the anus .
Most ocean mollusks have a gill or gills to absorb oxygen from the water .
Many species have a feeding structure , the radula , found only in mollusks .
The radula can be thought of as a `` tongue-like '' structure .
The radula is made mostly of chitin .
Types of radulae range from structures used to scrape algae off of rocks to the beaks of squid and octopuses .
Keep in mind the basic body plan can differ slightly among the mollusks .
In most species , a muscular foot , which helps the mollusk move .
Some mollusks use the foot for burrowing into the sand , and others use it for jet-propulsion .
A mantle , or fold of the outer skin lining the shell .
The mantle often releases calcium carbonate , which creates an external shell , just like the ones you find on the beach .
This phylum includes the earthworm and leech .
Scientists believe these two groups are related because , when they are in the early stage of development , they look very similar .
Mollusks also share features of their organ systems with segmented worms .
Regular physical exercise is important in preventing lifestyle diseases such as cardiovascular disease , some types of cancer , type 2 diabetes , and obesity .
Regular exercise also improves the health of the muscular system .
Exercise improves both muscular strength and muscular endurance .
Muscular strength is the ability of a muscle to use force during a contraction .
Muscular endurance is the ability of a muscle to continue to contract over a long time without getting tired .
Exercises are grouped into three types depending on the effect they have on the body : Aerobic exercises , such as cycling , walking , and running , increase muscular endurance and cardiovascular health .
Flexibility exercises , such as stretching , improve the range of motion of muscles and joints .
Regular stretching helps people avoid activity-related injuries .
Anaerobic exercises comprise brief periods of physical exertion and high-intensity , strength-training activities .
Anaerobic exercises cause muscles to get bigger and stronger .
Anaerobic exercises use a resistance against which the muscle has to work to lift or push away .
Aerobic exercises are exercises in which a low to moderate level of exertion can be sustained over long periods .
These are exercises that cause your heart to beat faster and allow your muscles to use oxygen to contract .
If you exercise aerobically , overtime , your muscles will not get easily tired , and you will use oxygen more efficiently .
Aerobic exercise -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- also helps improve cardiac muscle .
Sometimes muscles and tendons get injured when a person starts doing an activity before they have warmed up properly .
A warm up is a slow increase in the intensity of a physical activity that prepares muscles for an activity .
Strains and tendinitis are usually treated with rest , cold compresses , and stretching exercises that a physical therapist designs for each patient .
Injuries can also be prevented by proper rest and recovery .
If you do not get enough rest , your body will become injured and will not react well to exercise , or improve .
Warming up before the game helps the players avoid injuries .
Some warm-ups may include stretching exercises .
Warming up increases the blood flow to the muscles and increases the heart rate .
Warmed-up muscles and tendons are less likely to get injured .
For example , before running or playing soccer , a person might jog slowly to warm muscles and increase their heart rate .
Even elite athletes need to warm up -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
When you dont do a proper warm-up , several types of injuries can occur .
A strain happens when muscle or tendons tear .
But how do muscles make your bones move ?
They can not actively extend , though they can move or relax back into the non-contracted neutral position .
Therefore , to move bones in opposite directions , pairs of muscles must work in opposition .
Each muscle in the pair works against the other to move bones at the joints of the body .
The muscle that contracts to cause a joint to bend is called the flexor .
The muscle that contracts to cause the joint to straighten is called the extensor .
When one muscle is contracted , the other muscle from the pair is always elongated .
For example , the biceps and triceps muscles work together to allow you to bend and straighten your elbow .
Other muscles that work together are the quadriceps and hamstrings used to bend and straighten the knee , and the pectorals and trapezius used to move the arms and shoulders forward and backward .
A voluntary muscles usually works across a joint .
It is attached to both the bones on either side of the joint by strong cords called tendons .
Tendons are similar to ligaments , except that ligaments join bones to each other .
Muscles move the body by contracting against the skeleton .
By contracting , muscles pull on bones and allow the body to move .
Smooth muscles and cardiac muscles are not attached to bone .
Smooth muscle in the lungs helps the airways to expand and contract as necessary .
This muscle is found only in the heart .
When the cardiac muscle relaxes , the heart fills with blood .
This rhythmic contraction must continue for your whole life , luckily the heart muscle never gets tired .
If your heart beats 75 times a minute , how many times does it beat in an hour ?
Like skeletal muscles , smooth muscle fibers do contract together , causing the muscle to shorten .
The smooth muscle in the uterus helps a woman to push out her baby .
In the bladder , smooth muscle helps to push out urine .
Smooth muscles move food through the digestive tract .
In arteries , smooth muscle movements maintain the arteries diameter .
Smooth muscle regulates air flow in lungs .
Sometimes the wrong base is inserted in the new strand of DNA .
Mutations are a mechanism for how species evolve .
For example , suppose a mutation in an animals DNA causes the loss of an enzyme that makes a dark pigment in the animals skin .
If the population of animals has moved to a light colored environment , the animals with the mutant gene would have a lighter skin color and be better camouflaged .
This wrong base could become permanent .
A permanent change in the sequence of DNA is known as a mutation .
Once DNA has a mutation , that mutation will be copied each time the DNA replicates .
After cell division , each resulting cell will carry the mutation .
However , sometimes a mutation can cause a protein to be made incorrectly .
A defect in the protein can affect how well the protein works , or whether it works at all .
If a single base is deleted -LRB- called a deletion , which is also a point mutation -RRB- , there can be huge effects on the organism , because this may cause a frameshift mutation .
Remember that the bases in the mRNA are read in groups of three by the tRNA .
If the reading frame is off by even one base , the resulting sequence will consist of an entirely different set of codons .
Imagine the sentence : The big dog ate the red cat .
If you take out the second letter from `` big , '' the frame will be shifted so now it will read : The bgd oga tet her edc at .
A point mutation that adds a base -LRB- known as an insertion -RRB- would also result in a frameshift .
Mutations may also occur in chromosomes -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
These mutations are going to be fairly large mutations , possible affecting many genes .
Insertion : When a segment of DNA from one chromosome is added to another , unrelated chromosome .
Translocation : When two segments from different chromosomes change positions .
These usually result in many genes missing from the chromosome .
Duplication : When a segment of DNA is repeated , creating a longer chromosome .
These usually result in multiple copies of genes in the chromosome .
Many mutations are not caused by errors in replication .
Mutations can happen spontaneously , and they can be caused by mutagens in the environment .
Some chemicals , such as those found in tobacco smoke , can be mutagens .
Sometimes mutagens can also cause cancer .
Tobacco smoke , for example , is often linked to lung cancer .
Along with the skin , the integumentary system includes the nails and hair .
Both the nails and hair contain the tough protein , keratin .
The keratin forms fibers , which makes your nails and hair tough and strong .
Keratin is similar in toughness to chitin , the carbohydrate found in the exoskeleton of arthropods .
The Guinness Book of World Records began tracking record fingernail lengths in 1955 .
The record for women is held by an American woman .
Fingernails and toenails both grow from nail beds .
As the nail grows , more cells are added at the nail bed .
Older cells get pushed away from the nail bed and the nail grows longer .
Otherwise cutting your nails would hurt a lot !
Nails act as protective plates over the fingertips and toes .
Fingernails also help in sensing the environment .
Hair is one of the defining characteristics of mammals .
In humans , hair grows everywhere on the body except the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands , the lips , and the eyelids -LRB- except for eyelashes -RRB- .
Hair grows at a rate of about half an inch -LRB- 1.25 cm -RRB- each month , or about 6 inches -LRB- 15 cm -RRB- a year .
Hair , especially on the head , helps to keep the body warm .
The air traps a layer of warm air near the skin and acts like a warm blanket .
Hair can also act as a filter .
Nose hair helps to trap particles in the air that may otherwise travel to the lungs .
Eyelashes shield eyes from dust and sunlight .
Eyebrows stop salty sweat and rain from flowing into the eye .
The worlds longest documented hair , according to Guinness World Records , belongs to Xie Qiuping of China at just under 18 feet 6 inches -LRB- 5.627 m -RRB- when measured on May 8 , 2004 .
Hair sticks out from the epidermis , but it grows from the dermis -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Hair grows from inside the hair follicle .
New cells grow in the bottom part of the hair , called the bulb .
Older cells get pushed up , and the hair grows longer .
The cells that make up the hair strand are dead and filled with the rope-like protein keratin .
The oil , called sebum , helps to prevent water loss from the skin .
The sebaceous gland secretes sebum , which waterproofs the skin and hair .
Michelle was riding her scooter when she hit a hole in the street and started to lose control .
Control your internal body systems and keep them in balance .
Staying balanced when riding a scooter requires control over the bodys muscles .
The nervous system controls the muscles and maintains balance .
Prepare your body to fight or flee in an emergency .
The nervous system works by sending and receiving electrical signals .
The signals are carried by nerves in the body , similar to the wires that carry electricity all over a house .
The signals travel from all over the body to the spinal cord and up to the brain , as well as moving in the other direction .
For example , when Michelle started to fall off her scooter , her nervous system sensed that she was losing her balance .
Maybe these actions moved her hips or her arms .
The nervous system , working together with the muscular and skeletal systems , allowed Michelle to react to the situation .
As a result , Michelles body became balanced again .
The messages released by the nervous system traveled through nerves .
Just like the electricity that travels through wires , nerve quickly carry the electrical messages around the body .
Think about how quickly all this happens .
What would happen if a car pulled out unexpectedly in front of Michelle ?
A signal would have to go from her eyes to her brain and then to her muscles .
What allows the nervous system to react so fast .
Michelle can thank her nervous system for that -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The nervous system , together with the endocrine system , controls all the other organ systems .
The nervous system sends one type of signal around the body , and the endocrine system sends another type of signal around the body .
The endocrine system makes and releases chemical messenger molecules , or hormones , which tell other body parts that a change or a reaction is necessary .
So what type of signal does the nervous system send ?
Many disorders of the reproductive system are not sexually transmitted infections .
In both genders , the disorders could cause a little discomfort , or they could cause death .
If found early , cancer of the testes usually can be easily cured with surgery .
In teenagers , injuries to the testes most often occur while playing sports .
It occurs when cells in the testes grow out of control .
The cells form a lump called a tumor .
Disorders of the female reproductive system may affect the vagina , uterus , or ovaries .
An ovarian cyst is usually harmless , but it may cause pain .
Most cysts slowly disappear and do not need treatment .
Very large or painful cysts can be removed with surgery .
If the pain is severe , a doctor can prescribe stronger medicine to relieve the pain .
The cancer causes the cells of the breast to grow out of control and form a tumor .
It becomes more common as women get older .
If breast cancer is found early , it usually can be cured with surgery .
A yeast infection happens when the yeast multiply too fast and cause symptoms .
Bubble baths may be fun , but for women and girls they can cause irritation to the vagina .
A nonrenewable resource is a natural resource that is consumed or used up faster than it can be made by nature .
Alternative use of energy , especially in transportation , must become a standard feature of all cars and trucks and planes by the middle of the century .
Nuclear power is the use of nuclear energy -LRB- nuclear fission -RRB- to create energy inside of a nuclear reactor -LRB- Figure uranium fuel supplies , which will last to about the year 2100 -LRB- or longer -RRB- at current rates of use .
Population growth , especially in developing countries , should make people think about how fast they are consuming resources .
Governments around the world should seriously consider these issues .
Developing nations will also increase demands on natural resources as they build more factories -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Improvements in technology , conservation of resources , and controls in population growth could all help to decrease the demand on natural resources .
Per capita energy consumption -LRB- 2003 -RRB- shows the unequal distribution of wealth , technology , and energy use .
Fossil fuels , such as petroleum , coal , and natural gas , formed from plant and animal remains over periods from 50 to 350 million years ago .
Humans have been consuming fossil fuels for less than 200 years , yet remaining reserves of oil can supply our needs only until around the year 2055 .
Natural gas can only supply us until around 2085 .
Today , electric cars are becoming more and more common .
Considering the year 2055 is not that far away , what would happen if we ran out of gasoline ?
The main chemical components of living organisms are known as organic compounds .
Organic compounds are molecules built around the element carbon -LRB- C -RRB- .
Proteins C , H , O , N , S Enzymes , muscle fibers , antibodies Elements Examples Monomer building molecule -RRB- -LRB- small block Amino acids Carbohydrates C , H , O Sugar , glucose , starch , glycogen , cellulose Monosaccharides -LRB- simple sugars -RRB- Lipids C , H , O , P Fats , oils , waxes , steroids , phospho - lipids in membranes Often include fatty acids Nucleic Acids C , H , O , P , N DNA , RNA , ATP Nucleotides
Living things are made up of very large molecules .
These large molecules are called macromolecules because macro means large ; they are made by smaller molecules bonding together .
Our body gets these smaller molecules , the `` building blocks '' or monomers , of organic molecules from the food we eat .
The four main types of macromolecules found in living organisms , shown in Table 1.1 , are : 1 .
Simple sugars are known as monosaccharides .
Carbohydrates also include long chains of connected sugar molecules .
These long chains often consist of hundreds or thousands of monosaccharides bonded together to form polysaccharides .
Plants store sugar in polysaccharides called starch .
Animals store sugar in polysaccharides called glycogen .
You get the carbohydrates you need for energy from eating carbohydrate-rich foods , including fruits and vegetables , as well as grains , such as bread , rice , or corn .
All proteins are made of monomers called amino acids -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- that connect together like beads on a necklace -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Examples include enzymes , antibodies , and muscle fiber .
Enzymes are a type of protein that speed up chemical reactions .
For example , your stomach would not be able to break down food if it did not have special enzymes to speed up the rate of digestion .
Muscle fibers are made mostly of protein .
Its important for you and other animals to eat food with protein , because we can not make certain amino acids on our own .
There are only 20 common amino acids needed to build proteins .
When you eat food with protein , your body breaks the proteins down into individual amino acids and uses them to build new proteins .
These amino acids form in thousands of different combinations , making about 100,000 or more unique proteins in humans .
Proteins can differ in both the number and order of amino acids .
It is the number and order of amino acids that determines the shape of the protein , and it is the shape -LRB- structure -RRB- of the protein that determines the unique function of the protein .
This model shows the general structure of all amino acids .
Only the side chain , R , varies from one amino acid to another .
Have you ever tried to put oil in water ?
One of the most important are the phospholipids that make up the protective outer membrane of all cells -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
Animals use fats for long-term energy storage and to keep warm .
Plants use oils for long - term energy storage .
DNA is the molecule that stores our genetic information -LRB- Figure 1.6 -RRB- .
The single - stranded RNA is involved in making proteins .
Cells are grouped together to carry out specific functions .
A group of cells that work together form a tissue .
Connective tissue is made up of many different types of cells that are all involved in supporting and binding other tissues of the body .
Examples include tendon , cartilage , and bone .
Blood is also classified as a specialized connective tissue .
Muscle tissue is made up of bands of cells that contract and allow movement .
Nervous tissue is made up of nerve cells that sense stimuli and transmit signals .
Nervous tissue is found in nerves , the spinal cord , and the brain .
These tissues make up all structures and contents of your body .
An example of each tissue type is pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Epithelial tissue is made up of layers of tightly packed cells that line the surfaces of the body .
Examples of epithelial tissue include the skin , the lining of the mouth and nose , and the lining of the digestive system .
A single tissue alone can not do all the jobs that are needed to keep you alive and healthy .
Two or more tissues working together can do a lot more .
An organ is a structure made of two or more tissues that work together .
The heart -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- is made up of the four types of tissues .
The four different tissue types work to - gether in the heart as they do in the other organs .
But how does your heart get blood to and from every cell in your body ?
Your heart is connected to blood vessels such as veins and arteries .
Organs that work together form an organ system .
Together , your heart , blood , and blood vessels form your cardiovascular system .
Your bodys 12 organ systems are shown below -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- .
Your organ systems do not work alone in your body .
Organ System Integumentary Major Tissues and Organs Skin , hair , nails Muscular Cardiac -LRB- heart -RRB- muscle ; skeletal muscle ; smooth muscle ; tendons Brain , spinal cord ; nerves Nervous Reproductive Respiratory Female : uterus ; vagina ; fallopian tubes ; ovaries Male : penis ; testes ; seminal vesi - cles Trachea , larynx , pharynx , lungs Skeletal Bones , cartilage ; ligaments Urinary Kidneys ; urinary bladder Immune Bone marrow ; spleen ; white blood cells Function Provides protection from injury and water loss , physical defense against infection by microorganisms , and temperature control .
Brings air to sites where gas ex - change can occur between the blood and cells -LRB- around body -RRB- or blood and air -LRB- lungs -RRB- .
Removes extra water , salts , and waste products from blood and body ; controls pH ; controls water and salt balance .
For example , one of the most important functions of organ systems is to provide cells with oxygen and nutrients and to remove toxic waste products such as carbon dioxide .
There is good evidence that life has probably existed on Earth for most of Earths history .
Fossils of blue-green algae found in Australia are the oldest fossils of life forms on Earth .
In order to answer this question , scientists need to know what kinds of materials were available at that time .
Small molecules , such as those present in the early atmosphere , can provide the components -LRB- including the elements C , H , N , O and S -RRB- to make larger molecules .
These early molecules further reacted and eventually formed even larger molecules and organic compounds , such as amino acids -LRB- which combine to form proteins -RRB- , and nucleotides -LRB- which form nucleic acids - RNA or DNA -RRB- .
These organic molecules eventually came together in the right combinations to form basic cells .
Many scientists still study the origin of the first life forms because there are many questions left unanswered , such as , `` Did proteins or nucleic acids develop first ? ''
Some clues to the origins of life on Earth come from studying the early life forms that developed in hot springs , such as the Grand Prismatic Spring at Yellowstone National Park .
Scientists believe early Earth did not contain oxygen gas -LRB- photosynthesis had yet to evolve -RRB- , but did contain other gases , including : nitrogen gas , carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide , water vapor , hydrogen sulfide .
Some of the oldest fossils on Earth were found along the coast of Australia , similar to the area shown here .
Other chemicals would have come from meteorites in space .
Energy to drive chemical reactions was provided by volcanic eruptions and lightning .
Today , we have evidence that life on Earth came from random reactions between chem - ical compounds , which formed molecules , or groups of atoms bonded together .
Air is polluted when it contains many large toxic particles .
Primary pollutants are added directly to the atmosphere .
Fires add primary pollutants to the air .
Particles released from the fire directly enter the air and cause pollution -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Burning of fossil fuels such as oil and coal is a major source of primary pollutants -LRB- Figure Secondary pollutants are formed when primary pollutants interact with sunlight , air , or each other .
For example , ozone is created when some pollutants interact with sunlight .
High levels of ozone in the atmosphere can cause problems for humans .
Sometimes , humans can pollute the air .
A major source of air pollution is the burn - ing of fossil fuels from factories , power plants , and motor vehicles .
For example , releasing smoke and dust from factories and cars can cause air pollution .
Air pollution is due to chemical substances and particles released into the air mainly by human actions .
This pollution affects entire ecosystems around the world .
Pollution can also cause many human health problems , and it can also cause death .
Air pollution can be found both outdoors and indoors .
Outdoor air pollution is made of chemical particles .
When smoke or other pollutants enter the air , the particles found in the pollution mix with the air .
Fossil fuels are burned during many processes , including in power plants to create electricity , in factories to make machinery run , in power stoves and furnaces for heating , and in waste facilities .
Fossil fuels are used in cars , trains , and planes .
Air pollution can also be caused by agriculture , such as cattle ranching and the use of fertilizers and pesticides .
Other sources of air pollution include the production of plastics , refrigerants , and aerosols , in nuclear power and defense , from landfills and mining , and from biological warfare .
When acid rain falls in forests , freshwater habitats , or soils , it can kill insects and aquatic life .
Sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides in the air both cause acid rain to form -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Sulfur oxides are chemicals that are released from coal-fired power plants .
Nitrogen oxides are released from motor vehicle exhaust .
A forest in the Jizera Mountains of the Czech Republic shows effects caused by acid rain .
Pollutants also affect the atmosphere through their contribution to global warming .
Greenhouse gases can be released by factories that burn fossil fuels .
Over the past 20 years , burning fossil fuels has produced about three-quarters of the carbon dioxide from human activity .
Trees absorb carbon dioxide during cellular respiration , so when trees are cut down , they can not remove carbon dioxide from the air .
This increase in global temperature will cause the sea level to rise .
Global warming may also cause food shortages and species extinction .
Contagious diseases are also called infectious diseases .
An infectious disease is a disease that spreads from person to person .
Infectious diseases are caused by pathogens .
A pathogen is a living thing or virus that causes disease .
Living things that cause human diseases include bacteria , fungi , and protozoa .
Most infectious diseases caused by these organisms can be cured with medicines .
Fungi are simple eukaryotic organisms that consist of one or more cells .
Human diseases caused by fungi include ringworm and athletes foot .
A ringworm infection is pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
For example , medicines called antibiotics can cure most diseases caused by bacteria .
Its a disease caused by a fungus .
The fungus causes a ring-shaped rash on the skin , like the one shown here .
The protozoa infect people when they are bit by a mosquito .
More than a million people die of malaria each year .
Viruses are nonliving collections of protein and DNA that must reproduce inside of living cells .
Viruses cause many common diseases .
For example , viruses cause colds and the flu .
Cold sores are caused by the virus Herpes simplex This picture shows a one-celled organism called Giardia lamblia .
It is a protozoan that causes diarrhea .
Antibiotics do not affect viruses , because antibiotics only kill bacteria .
But medicines called antiviral drugs can treat many diseases caused by viruses .
Keep in mind that viruses are nonliving , so can they be killed ?
Another common disease caused by bacteria is strep throat .
Bacteria that cause strep throat are shown below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Different pathogens spread in different ways .
Droplets are released when a person sneezes or coughs .
Thousands of tiny droplets are released when a person sneezes -LRB- Figure 1.5 -RRB- .
Each droplet can contain thousands of pathogens .
Viruses that cause colds and the flu can spread in this way .
As this picture shows , thousands of tiny droplets are released into the air when a person sneezes .
Each droplet may carry thousands of pathogens .
They cause food borne illnesses , which are discussed in a previous concept .
Some pathogens spread through water .
Water can be boiled to kill Giardia and most other pathogens .
Several pathogens spread through sexual contact .
HIV is one example , which is discussed in the next concept .
Other pathogens that spread through sexual contact are discussed in a separate concept .
Many pathogens that cause respiratory diseases spread by droplets in the air .
Other pathogens spread when they get on objects or surfaces .
A fungus may spread in this way .
For example , you can pick up the fungus that causes athletes foot by wearing shoes that an infected person has worn .
Therefore , the chance of coming in contact with the fungus in one of these ways is fairly high .
Bacteria that cause the skin disease impetigo , which causes blisters , can spread when people share towels or clothes .
The bacteria can also spread through direct skin contact in sports like wrestling .
Within just a few years , the virus had spread throughout most of the United States .
Birds as well as humans can be infected with the virus .
Birds often fly long distances .
This is one reason why West Nile virus spread so quickly .
These insects tend to transfer protozoan or viral parasites .
When an insect bites an infected person or animal , it picks up the pathogen .
Then the pathogen travels to the next person or animal it bites .
Ticks carry the bacteria that cause Lyme disease .
Other diseases spread by mosquitoes include Dengue Fever and Yellow Fever .
The first case of West Nile virus in North America occurred in 1999 .
A pedigree is commonly created for families , and it outlines the inheritance patterns of genetic disorders and traits .
With dominant inheritance , all affected individuals will have at least one dominant allele .
A pedigree can help predict the probability that offspring will inherit a genetic disorder .
Pictured below is a pedigree displaying recessive inheritance of a disorder through three generations -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
From studying a pedigree , scientists can determine the following : If the trait is sex-linked -LRB- on the X or Y chromosome -RRB- or autosomal -LRB- on a chromosome that does not determine sex -RRB- .
If the trait is inherited in a dominant or recessive fashion .
Sometimes pedigrees can also help determine whether individuals with the trait are heterozygous -LRB- two different alleles -RRB- or homozygous -LRB- two of the same allele -RRB- .
Some points to keep in mind when analyzing a pedigree are : 1 .
With autosomal recessive inheritance , all affected individuals will be homozygous recessive .
There are other nerves in your body that are not found in the brain or spinal cord .
The peripheral nervous system -LRB- PNS -RRB- -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- contains all the nerves in the body that are found outside of the central nervous system .
Nerves that send and receive messages to the internal organs are also part of the peripheral nervous system .
The peripheral nervous system is divided into two parts , the sensory division and the motor division .
How these divisions of the peripheral nervous system are related to the rest of the nervous system is shown below -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Refer to the figure as you read more about the peripheral nervous system in the text that follows .
The sensory division carries messages from sense organs and internal organs to the central nervous system .
For example , when you breathe in chemicals given off by baking cookies , your nose does not tell you that you are smelling cookies .
The sense organs send messages about sights , smells , and other stimuli to the brain -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
The brain then reads the messages and tells you what they mean .
A certain area of the brain receives and interprets information from each sense organ .
For example , information from the nose is received and interpreted by the temporal lobe of the cerebrum .
Which senses would be stimulated by these raspberries ?
Sensory neurons in each sense organ receive stimuli , or messages from the environment that cause a response in the body .
For example , sensory neurons in the eyes send messages to the brain about light .
Sensory neurons in the skin send messages to the brain about touch .
Our sense organs recognize sensations , but they dont tell us what we are sensing .
The motor division of the peripheral system carries messages from the central nervous system to internal organs and muscles .
The motor division is also divided into two parts -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- , the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system .
Have you ever become frightened and felt your heart start pounding ?
The sympathetic division prepared you to deal with a possible emergency by increasing
The somatic nervous system carries messages that control body movements .
The girl pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- is using her somatic nervous system to control the muscles needed to play the violin .
Her brain sends messages to motor neurons that move her hands so she can play .
The autonomic nervous system carries nerve impulses to internal organs .
If a plant gets hungry , it can not walk to a local restaurant and buy a slice of pizza .
So , how does a plant get the food it needs to survive ?
During photosynthesis , carbon dioxide and water combine with solar energy to create glucose , a carbohydrate -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- , and oxygen .
The process can be summarized as : in the presence of sunlight , carbon dioxide + water glucose + oxygen .
Glucose , the main product of photosynthesis , is a sugar that acts as the `` food '' source for plants .
The glucose is then converted into usable chemical energy , ATP , during cellular respiration .
The oxygen formed during photosynthesis , which is necessary for animal life , is essentially a waste product of the photosynthesis process .
Actually , almost all organisms obtain their energy from photosynthetic organisms .
For example , if a bird eats a caterpillar , then the bird gets the energy that the caterpillar gets from the plants it eats .
So the bird indirectly gets energy that began with the glucose formed through photosynthesis .
Therefore , the process of photosynthesis is central to sustaining life on Earth .
Plants are producers , which means they are able to make , or produce , their own food .
Only cells with chloroplastsplant cells and algal -LRB- protist -RRB- cellscan perform photosynthesis .
Animal cells and fungal cells do not have chloroplasts and , therefore , can not photosynthesize .
That is why these organisms , as well as the non - photosynthetic protists , rely on other organisms to obtain their energy .
The Photosynthesis Song explaining photosynthesis , can be heard at Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Autotrophs are the organisms that collect the energy from the sun and turn it into organic compounds .
So once again , how does a plant get the food it needs to survive ?
Photosynthesis is the process plants use to make their own food from the suns energy , carbon dioxide , and water .
This MIT video demonstrates an experiment about the different pigments in leaves .
Another exception to Mendels rules is polygenic inheritance , which occurs when a trait is controlled by more than one gene .
This means that each dominant allele `` adds '' to the expression of the next dominant allele .
Height is a polygenic trait , controlled by at least three genes with six alleles .
Polygenic inheritance often results in a bell shaped curve when you analyze the population -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
That means that most people fall in the middle of the phenotypic range , such as average height , while very few people are at the extremes , such as very tall or very short .
Population growth rate depends on birth rates and death rates , as well as migration .
For an ecosystem to be stable , populations in that system must be healthy , and that usually means reproducing as much as their environment allows .
Do organisms reproduce yearly or every few years ?
Do organisms reproduce for much of their life , or just part of their life ?
Do organisms produce many offspring at once , or just a few , or even just one ?
All these factors play a role in the growth of a population .
Organisms can use different strategies to increase their reproduction rate .
This care is often seen in bird species .
If the birth rate is larger than the death rate , then the population grows .
Compared to precocial organisms , altricial organisms have a longer period of development before they reach maturity .
Precocial organisms , such as the geese shown below , can take care of themselves at birth and do not require help from their parents -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
In order to reproduce as much as possible , altricial and precocial organisms must use very different strategies .
-LRB- right -RRB- The Canada goose shows a precocial repro - ductive strategy .
If the birth and death rates are equal , then the population size will not change .
Factors that affect population growth are : 1 .
Migration affects population growth rate .
Maybe you have heard that birds fly south for the winter .
In the fall , birds fly thousands of miles to the south where it is warmer .
Monarch butterflies also migrate from Mexico to the northern U.S. in the summer and back to Mexico in the winter .
A flock of barnacle geese fly in formation during the autumn migration .
This increases the population size and growth rate .
This decreases the population size and growth rate .
The earlier growth rate equation can be modified to account for migration : growth rate = -LRB- birth rate + immigration rate -RRB- -LRB- death rate + emigration rate -RRB- .
Population growth can be described with two models , based on the size of the population and necessary resources .
These two types of growth are known as exponential growth and logistic growth .
Sometimes , a fire will wipe out all of the available nutrients .
Sometimes a predator will kill many individuals in a population .
How do you think these limits affect the way organisms grow ?
If a population is given unlimited amounts of resources , such as food and water , land if needed , moisture , oxygen , and other environmental factors , it will grow exponentially .
Exponential growth occurs as a population grows larger , dramatically increasing the growth rate .
This is shown as a `` J-shaped '' curve below -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
You can see that the population grows slowly at first , but as time passes , growth occurs more and more rapidly .
Growth of populations according to ex - ponential -LRB- or J-curve -RRB- growth model -LRB- left -RRB- and logistic -LRB- or S-curve -RRB- growth model -LRB- right -RRB- .
Time is plotted on the x-axis , and population size is plotted on the y-axis .
While a woman is pregnant , the developing baby may be called an embryo or a fetus .
Do these mean the same thing ?
No , in the very early stages the developing baby is called an embryo , while in the later stages it is called a fetus .
When the ball of cells first implants into the uterus , it is called an embryo .
The embryo stage lasts until the end of the 8th week after fertilization .
After that point until birth , the developing baby is called a fetus .
During the embryo stage , the baby grows in size .
3rd week after fertilization : Cells of different types start to develop .
Most organs develop in the embryo during weeks four through eight .
Cells that will form muscles and skin , for example , start to develop at this time .
4th week after fertilization : Body organs begin to form .
8th week after fertilization : All the major organs have started to develop .
Pictured below are some of the changes that take place during the 4th and 8th weeks -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Look closely at the two embryos in the figure .
Notice that it has arms and legs and lacks a tail .
The face has also started to form , and it is much bigger .
There are also many changes that take place after the embryo becomes a fetus .
Hair has started to grow on the head .
The body of the fetus is also starting to fill out as muscles and bones develop .
Babies born after the 28th week are usually able to survive .
A baby should not be delivered prior to this time , unless absolutely necessary .
A baby born prior to week 28 will need considerable medical intervention to survive .
During the last several weeks of the fetal period , all of the organs become mature .
By the end of the 38th week , all of the organs are working , and the fetus is ready to be born .
This is when birth normally occurs .
A baby born before this time is considered premature .
Its fingers and toes are also fully formed .
In addition , the reproductive organs have developed to make the baby a male or female .
The brain and lungs are also developing quickly .
The fetus has started to move around inside the uterus .
This is usually when the mother first feels the fetus moving .
By the 28th week , the fetus is starting to look much more like a baby .
During pregnancy , other structures also develop inside the mothers uterus .
Some of the vessels come from the mother .
The placenta is attached to the inside of the mothers uterus .
The fetus is connected to the placenta by a tube called the umbilical cord .
The cord contains two arteries and a vein .
Substances pass back and forth between the mothers and fetuss blood through the placenta and cord .
Surrounding the fetus is the fluid-filled amniotic sac .
In addition to eating well , the mother must avoid substances that could harm the embryo or fetus .
These include alcohol , illegal drugs , and some medicines .
The placenta and umbilical cord are also shown here .
Exposure to harmful substances during this time could damage the developing body systems .
The amniotic sac is a membrane that surrounds the fetus .
It is filled with water and dissolved substances , known as amniotic fluid .
Imagine placing a small plastic toy inside a balloon and then filling the balloon with water .
The toy would be cushioned and protected by the water .
During childbirth , a baby passes from the uterus , through the vagina , and out of the mothers body .
Childbirth usually starts when the amniotic sac breaks .
As a result , carbon dioxide builds up in the babys blood .
This triggers the baby to start breathing .
The amniotic sac and placenta pass through the vagina and out of the body shortly after the birth of the baby .
Eventually , the contractions squeeze the baby out of the uterus .
Once the baby enters the vagina , the mother starts pushing .
As soon as the baby is born , the umbilical cord is cut .
After the cord is cut , the baby can no longer get rid of carbon dioxide through the cord and placenta .
Since we have such a limited supply of water , it is important to preserve our water supplies .
Therefore , steps have been taken to prevent water pollution .
Technologies have also been developed to conserve water and prevent water pollution .
Some scientists believe of a potential future crisis in both Asia and Africa from pollution and depletion of natural water resources .
Diminished water supplies could increase the risk of both internal conflicts or wars between countries .
That means that it is used faster than it is replaced .
Theoretically , at some point in time , the supply of fresh water could run out .
As these populations continue to grow , the supply of water becomes an increasingly important issue .
It takes special equipment , such as a desalination plant , and a lot of energy -LRB- and money -RRB- to convert salt water into fresh water .
Of all the water on Earth , only about 1 % can be used for drinking water .
In the U.S. , concern over water pollution has resulted in many federal laws .
Some of these laws go all the way back to the 1800s !
The laws prohibit the disposal of any waste into the nations rivers , lakes , streams , and other bodies of water , unless a person first has a permit .
Growing concern for controlling water pollutants led to the enactment of the Clean Water Act in 1972 .
It also limits the pollution that can enter the waterways .
Other countries are also actively preventing water pollution and purifying water -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Contaminants are removed to make clean water .
Fresh water is also preserved by purifying wastewater .
Wastewater is water that has been used for cleaning , washing , flushing , or manufacturing .
It includes the water that goes down your shower drain and that is flushed down your toilet .
Instead of dumping wastewater directly into rivers , wastewater can be purified at a water treatment plant -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
When wastewater is recycled , waterborne diseases caused by pathogens in sewage can be prevented .
Infectious diseases are diseases that spread from person to person .
They are caused by pathogens such as bacteria , viruses or fungi .
Cover your mouth when you cough or sneeze .
The best way to avoid pathogens is to wash your hands often .
For example , ticks and mosquitoes are vectors , so you should wear long sleeves and long pants when appropriate to avoid tick and mosquito bites .
Many infectious diseases can be prevented with vaccinations .
Immunization can drastically reduce your chances of contracting many diseases .
Vaccinations can help prevent measles , mumps , chicken pox , and several other diseases .
If you do develop an infectious disease , try to avoid infecting others .
Also , take steps to keep your germs to yourself .
Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you sneeze or cough , Watching the news will allow you to make informed decisions .
If tomatoes are making people sick , dont eat tomatoes until the outbreak is over .
Local news can tell you of restaurants to avoid due to unhealthy conditions .
In addition , you should also wash the food that your eat , and the utensils and countertop where food is prepared .
In addition , you should wash your hands after being around sick people .
The correct way to wash your hands is demonstrated below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
If soap and water arent available , use some hand sanitizer .
Recall that a vector is an organism that carries pathogens from one person or animal to another .
Noninfectious diseases cant be passed from one person to another .
Instead , these types of diseases are caused by factors such as the environment , genetics , and lifestyle .
Heart disease , stroke and diabetes are mostly linked to lifestyle choices , even when family history puts a person at higher risk for the diseases .
Most allergies can be prevented by avoiding the substances that cause them .
A good way to remember how to avoid poison ivy is `` leaves of three , let it be . ''
The shots contain tiny amounts of allergens , which are the substances that cause an allergic reaction .
After many months or years of shots , the immune system gets used to the allergens and no longer responds to them .
Examples of inherited noninfectious conditions include cystic fibrosis and Down syndrome .
But choosing a healthy lifestyle can help prevent type 2 diabetes .
Getting plenty of exercise , avoiding high-fat foods , and staying at a healthy weight can reduce the risk of developing this type of diabetes .
Making these healthy lifestyle choices can also help prevent some types of cancer .
In addition , you can lower the risk of cancer by avoiding carcinogens , which are substances that cause cancer .
How to choose a sunscreen that offers the most protection is explained below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Some people think that tanning beds are a safe way to get a tan .
Tanning beds expose the skin to UV radiation .
Any exposure to UV radiation increases the risk of skin cancer .
It doesnt matter whether the radiation comes from tanning lamps or the sun .
Overall , people in many developed countries are contributing to higher rates of noninfectious diseases -LRB- heart disease , stroke , diabetes and cancer -RRB- by taking advantage of technology and social environments that encourage a less active lifestyle , and also encourages faster and cheaper meals .
For example , many children now spend more time on their computer or watching TV then playing outdoors .
Even though many people are living longer , they can choose to live more healthily by adopting regular exercise routines and healthy eating habits .
Also , choose a sunscreen that protects against both UVB and UVA radiation .
Examples of conditions caused by environmental or lifestyle factors include heart disease and skin cancer .
For example , cutting down on exposure to cigarette smoke and the suns rays will prevent certain types of cancer .
The chronic noninfectious diseases that cause the most deaths in many developed countries are largely preventable .
Cellular respiration is the process of extracting energy in the form of ATP from the glucose in the food you eat .
How does cellular respiration happen inside of the cell ?
These cristae greatly increase the membrane surface area where many of the cellular respiration reactions take place .
During this step , this energy is used to produce ATP .
Oxygen is needed to help the process of turning glucose into ATP .
The later steps release much more ATP .
In stage one , glucose is broken down in the cytoplasm of the cell in a process called glycolysis .
In stage two , the pyruvate molecules are transported into the mitochondria .
The mitochondria are the organelles known as the energy `` powerhouses '' of the cells -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
In the mitochondria , the pyruvate , which have been converted into a 2-carbon molecule , enter the Krebs cycle .
Notice that mitochondria have an inner membrane with many folds , called cristae .
Oxygen enters the body when an organism breathes .
Glucose enters the body when an organism eats .
What does the cell produce ?
Carbon dioxide is transported from your mitochondria out of your cell , to your red blood cells , and back to your lungs to be exhaled .
ATP is generated in the process .
When one molecule of glucose is broken down , it can be converted to a net total of 36 or 38 molecules of ATP .
This only occurs in the presence of oxygen .
Using chemical symbols the equation is represented as follows : C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 6CO2 + 6H2 O ATP is generated during the process .
Though this equation may not seem that complicated , cellular respiration is a series of chemical reactions divided into three stages : glycolysis , the Krebs cycle , and the electron transport chain .
Glycolysis converts the 6-carbon glucose into two 3-carbon pyruvate molecules .
During glycolysis a small amount of NADH is made as are four ATP .
The NADH temporarily holds energy , which will be used in stage three .
In the presence of oxygen , under aerobic conditions , pyruvate enters the mitochondria to proceed into the Krebs cycle .
A small amount of ATP is also made during this process .
This process occurs in a continuous cycle , named after its discover , Hans Krebs .
The Krebs cycle uses a 2-carbon molecule -LRB- acetyl-CoA -RRB- derived from pyruvate and produces carbon dioxide .
Stage three of cellular respiration is the use of NADH and FADH2 to generate ATP .
First , the NADH and FADH2 enter an electron transport chain , where their energy is used to pump , by active transport , protons -LRB- H + -RRB- into the intermembrane space of mitochondria .
This establishes a proton gradient across the inner membrane .
These protons then flow down their concentration gradient , moving back into the matrix by facilitated diffusion .
During this process , ATP is made by adding inorganic phosphate to ADP .
Most of the ATP produced during cellular respiration is made during this stage .
For each glucose that starts cellular respiration , in the presence of oxygen -LRB- aerobic conditions -RRB- , 36-38 ATP are generated .
Breathing is only part of the process of bringing oxygen to where it is needed in the body .
The oxygen molecules move , by diffusion , out of the capillaries and into the body cells .
Carbon dioxide is brought , through the blood , back to the heart and then to the lungs .
Why is oxygen needed by each cell in your body ?
Oxygen is needed in the final stage of cellular respiration , which is the process of converting glucose into ATP .
As ATP is needed for the cells to function properly , every cell in your body needs oxygen .
Getting that oxygen begins with inhaling .
The oxygen moves into your blood , where it travels to every cell in your body .
The oxygen enters the bloodstream from the alveoli , tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Oxygen-rich blood is then pumped through the aorta , the large artery that receives blood directly from the heart .
In organisms , this work can be physical work , like walking or jumping , or it can be the work used to carry out the chemical processes in their cells .
Many producers make their own food through the process of photosynthesis .
The `` food '' the producers make is the sugar , glucose .
Producers make food for the rest of the ecosystem .
As energy is not recycled , energy must consistently be captured by producers .
This energy is then passed on to the organisms that eat the producers , and then to the organisms that eat those organisms , and so on .
Recall that the only required ingredients needed for photosynthesis are sunlight , carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- , and wa - ter -LRB- H2 O -RRB- .
From these simple inorganic ingredients , photosynthetic organisms produce the carbohydrate glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- , and other complex organic compounds .
Essentially , these producers are changing the energy from the sunlight into a usable form of energy .
Every biochemical reaction that occurs in an organisms cells needs energy .
Without producers capturing the energy from the sun and turning it into glucose , an ecosystem could not exist .
Algae , which is the green layer you might see floating on a pond , are an example of phytoplankton .
There are also bacteria that use chemical processes to produce food .
This process is known as chemosynthesis , and is common in ecosystems without sunlight , such as certain marine ecosystems .
Producers include -LRB- a -RRB- plants , -LRB- b -RRB- algae , and -LRB- c -RRB- diatoms .
All organisms need a constant supply of energy to stay alive .
Some organisms can get the energy directly from the sun .
Other organisms get their energy from other organisms .
Through predator-prey relationships , the energy of one organism is passed on to another .
Energy is constantly flowing through a community .
With just a few exceptions , all life on Earth depends on the suns energy for survival .
The energy of the sun is first captured by producers -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , organisms that can make their own food .
Puberty lasts from about 12 to 18 years of age in boys and from about 10 to 16 years of age in girls .
The testes start making sperm .
The shoulders broaden , and the voice becomes deeper .
In girls , puberty begins when the pituitary gland tells the ovaries to secrete estrogen .
Estrogen causes the following to happen : 1 .
But boys grow faster than girls during puberty .
Their period of fast growth also lasts longer .
Children that begin puberty much earlier or later than their peers may feel self-conscious .
In boys , puberty begins when the pituitary gland tells the testes to secrete testosterone .
Testosterone causes the following to happen : 1 .
Adolescence includes the physical changes of puberty .
Teenagers usually spend much more time with peers than with family members .
It also includes many other changes , including significant mental , emotional , and social changes .
During adolescence : Teenagers develop new thinking abilities .
Teenagers try to establish a sense of who they are as individuals .
Genes are cloned for many reasons , including use in medicine and in agriculture .
Below are the steps used to copy , or clone , a gene : 1 .
A gene or piece of DNA is put in a vector , or carrier molecule , producing a recombinant DNA molecule .
The vector is placed into a host cell , such as a bacterium .
The gene is copied -LRB- or cloned -RRB- inside of the bacterium .
Recombinant DNA technology is useful in gene cloning and in identifying the function of a gene .
Over a 12 - to 24-hour period , millions of copies of the cloned DNA are made .
The cloned DNA can produce a protein -LRB- like insulin -RRB- that can be used in medicine or in research .
Recombinant DNA technology can also be used to produce useful proteins , such as insulin .
To treat diabetes , many people need insulin .
Previously , insulin had been taken from animals .
Through recombinant DNA technology , bacteria were created that carry the human gene which codes for the production of insulin .
These bacteria become tiny factories that produce this protein .
Recombinant DNA technology helps create insulin so it can be used by humans .
Recombinant DNA technology is used in gene cloning .
Bacteria have small rings of DNA in the cytoplasm , called plasmids -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
When putting foreign DNA into a bacterium , the plasmids are often used as a vector .
Viruses can also be used as vectors .
This image shows a drawing of a plasmid .
The plasmid has two large segments and one small segment depicted .
The two large segments -LRB- green and blue -RRB- indicate antibiotic resistances usually used in a screening procedure .
The antibiotic resis - tance segments ensure only bacteria with the plasmid will grow .
The small segment -LRB- red -RRB- indicates an origin of replication .
During your lifetime , it is possible that the world may run out of some nonrenewable resources , especially as the population passes 8 then 9 billion people .
You may have heard people say , `` Reduce , Reuse , Recycle . ''
But what do each one of those words truly mean ?
Put kitchen and garden waste into a compost pile .
The use of air conditioning uses a lot of energy .
In winter , make sure your furnace is working properly and make sure there is enough insulation on windows and doors .
Mend broken or worn items instead of buying new ones .
When you go shopping for items , buy quantities you know you will use without waste .
When buying a new vehicle , check into hybrid , semi-hybrid , or electric models to cut down on gas usage and air pollution .
That could also mean cutting down on use of natural resources .
Minimizing of waste may be difficult to achieve for individuals and households , but here are some starting points that you can include in your daily routine to reduce the use of resources : Turn lights off when not using them .
Turn the television off when no one is watching .
Reduce water use by turning off faucets when not using water .
Use low-flow shower heads , which save on water and use less energy .
Lets now look at what we can reuse .
Reusing includes using the same item again for the same function and also using an item again for a new function .
Rain can be caught in rain barrels and used to water your garden .
New packaging regulations are helping society to move towards these goals .
Water is a resource that can be reused for numerous purposes .
Some ways of reusing resources include : Use reusable bags when shopping .
Water that has been used for laundry , for example , can be used to water the garden or flush toilets .
At the town level , purified sewage water can be used for fountains , watering public parks or golf courses , fire fighting , and irrigating crops .
Each type of recyclable requires a different recycling technique .
Here are some things you can do to recycle in your home , school , or community : Laws can also be created to make sure people and companies reduce , reuse , and recycle .
Individuals can vote for leaders who stand for sustainable ecological practices .
Recycling involves processing used materials in order to make them suitable for other uses .
If you and your family only buy from companies and restaurants that support recycling or eco-friendly packaging , then other companies will also change to be more environmentally friendly .
That usually means taking a used item , breaking it down , and reusing the pieces .
Even though recycling requires extra energy , it does often make use of items which are broken , worn out , or can not be reused .
The things that are commonly recycled include : Batteries .
A resource is renewable if it is remade by natural processes at the same rate that humans use it up .
A sustainable resource is a resource that is used in a way that meets the needs of the present without keeping future generations from meeting their needs .
People can sustainably harvest wood , cork , and bamboo .
Farmers can also grow crops sustainably by not planting the same crop in their soil year after year .
Planting the same crop each year can remove nutrients from the soil .
This means that wood , cork , bamboo , and crops can be sustainable resources .
A nonrenewable resource is one that can not be replaced as easily as it is consumed .
Every year , 30 % more wind energy is used to create electricity .
Hydropower -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- , which uses the energy of moving water to turn turbines -LRB- similar to windmills -RRB- or water wheels , that create electricity .
This form of energy produces no waste or pollution .
Geothermal power , which uses the natural flow of heat from the Earths core to produce steam .
This steam is used to turn turbines which create electricity .
Biomass production involves using organic matter -LRB- `` biomass '' -RRB- from plants to create electricity .
Using corn to make ethanol fuel is an example of biomass generated energy .
They take millions of years to form naturally , and so they can not be replaced as fast as they are consumed .
Tides in the ocean can also turn a turbine to create electricity .
This energy can then be stored until needed -LRB- Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
To take the place of fossil fuel use , alternative energy resources are being developed .
These alternative energy sources often utilize renewable resources .
The following are examples of sustainable alternative energy resources : Solar power , which uses solar cells to turn sunlight into electricity -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The electricity can be used to power anything that uses normal coal-generated electricity .
Wind power , which uses windmills to transform wind energy into electricity .
But wind energy is growing fast .
Scientists at the Massachusetts of Technology are turning trash into coal , which can readily be used to heat homes and cook food in developing countries .
See http://youtu.be/GzhFgEYiVyY?list=PLzMhsCgGKd1hoofiKuifwy6qRXZs7NG6a for more information .
As was discussed in previous concepts , both infectious and noninfectious diseases of the reproductive system can be very serious .
Manage stress in healthy ways .
Keeping your genitals clean is also very important .
Females do not need to use special feminine hygiene products .
In fact , using them may do more harm than good because they can irritate the vagina or other reproductive structures .
For example , never get a tattoo or piercing unless you are sure that the needles have not been used before .
Of course , the only way to be fully protected against STIs is to refrain from sexual activity .
Contact sports include football , boxing , and hockey .
Wearing a cup will help protect the testes from injury .
Signs and symptoms of toxic shock syndrome develop suddenly , and the disease can be fatal .
The disease involves fever , shock , and problems with the function of several body organs .
Girls should also get in the habit of doing a monthly self-exam to check for breast cancer .
Although breast cancer is rare in teens , its a good idea to start doing the exam when you are young .
Breathing is mostly an involuntary action that is controlled by a part of your brain that also controls your heart beat .
The rib muscles contract and cause the ribs to move outward .
This causes the chest volume to increase .
This difference in air pressures causes air to be sucked into the lungs .
When the diaphragm and rib muscles relax , air is pushed out of the lungs .
Exhalation is similar to letting the air out of a balloon .
How does the inhaled oxygen get into the bloodstream ?
The exchange of gasses between the lungs and the blood happens in tiny sacs called alveoli .
The walls of the alveoli are very thin and allow gases to pass though them .
Oxygen moves from the alveoli to the blood in the capillaries that surround the alveoli .
The gases move by simple diffusion , passing from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration .
Taking air into the body through the nose and mouth is called inhalation .
Pushing air out of the body through the nose or mouth is called exhalation .
The woman pictured below is exhaling before she surfaces from the pool water -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
How do lungs allow air in ?
Air moves into and out of the lungs by the movement of muscles .
The most important muscle in the process of breathing is the diaphragm , a sheet of muscle that spreads across the bottom of the rib cage .
The diaphragm and rib muscles contract and relax to move air into and out of the lungs .
The process of getting oxygen into the body and releasing carbon dioxide is called respiration .
Sometimes breathing is called respiration , but there is much more to respiration than just breathing .
The process of respiration also includes the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the cells of the body .
These diseases can range from a mild cold to a severe case of pneumonia .
Many are easily treated , while others may cause severe illness or death .
Some respiratory diseases are caused by bacteria or viruses , while others are caused by environmental pollutants , such as tobacco smoke .
This boy is suffering from whooping cough -LRB- also known as pertussis -RRB- , which gets its name from the loud whooping sound that is made when the person inhales during a coughing fit .
Bronchitis is an inflammation of the bronchi , the air passages that conduct air into the lungs .
The bronchi become red and swollen with infection .
Acute bronchitis is usually caused by viruses or bacteria , and may last several days or weeks .
It is characterized by a cough that produces phlegm , or mucus .
Symptoms include shortness of breath and wheezing .
Acute bronchitis is usually treated with antibiotics .
Asthma is a chronic illness in which the bronchioles , the tiny branches into which the bronchi are divided , become inflamed and narrow -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The muscles around the bronchioles contract , which narrows the airways .
Asthma can be controlled by taking medication and by avoiding contact with environmental triggers for asthma , like smoking .
Large amounts of mucus are also made by the cells in the lungs .
Asthma can be caused by different things , such as allergies .
Asthma can also be caused by cold air , warm air , moist air , exercise , or stress .
Asthma is not contagious and can not be passed on to other people .
Children and adolescents who have asthma can still lead active lives if they control their asthma .
Pneumonia is an illness that occurs when the alveoli , the tiny sacs in the lungs where gas exchange takes place , become inflamed and filled with fluid .
When a person has pneumonia , gas exchange can not occur properly across the alveoli .
Pneumonia can be caused by many things .
Infection by bacteria , viruses , fungi , or parasites can cause pneumonia .
An injury caused by chemicals or a physical injury to the lungs can also cause pneumonia .
Symptoms of pneumonia include cough , chest pain , fever , and difficulty breathing .
Treatment depends on the cause of pneumonia .
Bacterial pneumonia is treated with antibiotics .
Pneumonia is a common illness that affects people in all age groups .
Tuberculosis -LRB- TB -RRB- is a common and often deadly disease caused by a genus of bacterium called Mycobacterium .
Tuberculosis most commonly attacks the lungs but can also affect other parts of the body .
TB is a chronic disease , but most people who become infected do not develop the full disease .
Symptoms include a cough , which usually contains mucus and coughing up blood .
The TB bacteria are spread in the air when people who have the disease cough , sneeze , or spit , so it is very contagious .
To help prevent the spread of the disease , public health notices , such as the one pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- , remind people how to stop the spread of the disease .
A public health notice from the early 20th century reminded people that TB could be spread very easily .
Lung cancer is a disease in which the cells found in the lungs grow out of control .
The growing mass of cells can form a tumor that pushes into nearby tissues .
The tumor will affect how these tissues work .
The inside of a lung showing cancerous tissue .
Symptoms of emphysema include shortness of breath , especially during exercise , and chronic cough , usually due to cigarette smoking , and wheezing , especially during expiration .
Many respiratory diseases are caused by pathogens .
The quality of the air you breathe can affect the health of your lungs .
Asthma , heart and lung diseases , allergies , and several types of cancers are all linked to air quality .
Air pollution is not just found outdoors ; indoor air pollution can also be responsible for health problems .
Exposure to tobacco smoke by smoking or by breathing air that contains tobacco smoke is the leading cause of preventable death in the United States .
Regular smokers die about 10 years earlier than nonsmokers do .
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- describes tobacco use as `` the single most important preventable risk to human health The lung of a smoker who had emphysema -LRB- left -RRB- .
Tar , a sticky , black substance found in tobacco smoke , is evident .
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease -LRB- right -RRB- , is a tobacco-related disease that is characterized by emphysema .
This represents the influenza virus that causes the swine flu , or H1N1 .
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that children between the ages of 6 months and 19 years get a flu vaccination each year .
Simply stated : Stopping smoking can prevent many respiratory diseases .
The common cold and flu are caused by viruses .
The influenza virus that causes the flu is pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.6 -RRB- .
Tuberculosis , whooping cough , and acute bronchitis are caused by bacteria .
The pathogens that cause colds , flu , and TB can be passed from person to person by coughing , sneezing , and spitting .
Illnesses caused by bacteria can be treated with antibiotics .
Those caused by viruses can not .
We know that many respiratory illnesses are caused by bacteria or viruses .
There are steps you can take to help the spread of these pathogens , and also to prevent you from catching one .
Furthermore , many respiratory illnesses are caused by poor habits , such as smoking .
Many of the diseases related to smoking are called lifestyle diseases .
Lifestyle diseases are diseases that are caused by choices that people make in their daily lives .
For example , the choice to smoke can lead to emphysema , cancer and heart disease in later life .
There are many things you can do to keep yourself healthy .
Cigarette smoking can cause serious diseases , so not smoking or quitting now are the most effective ways to reduce your risk of developing chronic respiratory diseases , such as lung cancer .
Avoiding -LRB- or stopping -RRB- smoking is the single best way to prevent many respiratory and cardiovascular diseases .
Eating healthy foods , getting enough sleep , and being active every day can help keep your respiratory system , cardiovascular system and immune system strong .
Getting enough exercise makes your lungs stronger and better at giving your body the oxygen it needs .
These can also , of course , keep your skeletal and muscular systems strong .
Washing your hands often , especially after sneezing , coughing , or blowing your nose , helps to protect you and others from diseases .
Washing your hands for 20 seconds with soap and warm water can help prevent colds and flu .
Some viruses and bacteria can live from 20 minutes to two hours or more on surfaces like cafeteria tables , doorknobs , and desks .
Washing your hands often can remove many of these pathogens .
Never touch your mouth , nose , or eyes without washing your hands .
Do not go to school or to other public places when you are sick .
Do not share food and other things that go in the mouth , as in guzzling milk from the carton or double dipping chips .
Cover your mouth with a tissue when you cough or sneeze and to dispose of the tissue yourself .
No time to grab a tissue .
Getting the recommended vaccinations can help prevent diseases , such as whooping cough and flu .
In fact , a yearly flu vaccine is recommended for everyone who is at least 6 months of age .
The flu vaccine is especially important for people who are at high risk of developing serious complications -LRB- like pneumonia -RRB- if they get sick with the flu .
People who have certain medical conditions including asthma , diabetes , and chronic lung disease , pregnant women , and people younger than 5 years -LRB- and especially those younger than 2 -RRB- , and people 65 years and older should also make sure they get the yearly flu vaccine .
Seeking medical help for diseases like asthma can help stop the disease from getting worse .
Your respiratory system is made up of the tissues and organs that allow oxygen to enter your body and carbon dioxide to leave your body .
Organs in your respiratory system include your : Nose .
The nose and the nasal cavity filter , warm , and moisten the air you breathe .
The nose hairs and the mucus produced by the cells in the nose catch particles in the air and keep them from entering the lungs .
Behind the nasal cavity , air passes through the pharynx , a long tube .
The larynx , also called the `` voice box , '' is found just below the pharynx .
Your voice comes from your larynx .
Air from the lungs passes across thin tissues in the larynx and produces sound .
The trachea , or windpipe , is a long tube that leads down to the lungs , where it divides into the right and left bronchi .
There is small flap called the epiglottis that covers your trachea when you eat or drink .
The muscle controlling the epiglottis is involuntary and prevents food from entering your lungs or wind pipe .
The bronchioles lead to the alveoli .
Oxygen is exchanged for carbon dioxide in the alveoli .
That means oxygen enters the blood , and carbon dioxide moves out of the blood .
The gases are exchanged between the blood and alveoli by simple diffusion .
The diaphragm is a sheet of muscle that spreads across the bottom of the rib cage .
When the diaphragm contracts , the chest volume gets larger , and the lungs take in air .
When the diaphragm relaxes , the chest volume gets smaller , and air is pushed out of the lungs .
These structures are shown below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
DNA contains the instructions to create proteins , but it does not make proteins itself .
DNA is located in the nucleus , which it never leaves , while proteins are made on ribosomes in the cytoplasm .
More about RNAs will be discussed during the Transcription and Translation Concepts .
The RNA nucleotide is different from the DNA nucleotide in the following ways : RNA contains a different kind of sugar , called ribose .
In RNA , the base uracil -LRB- U -RRB- replaces the thymine -LRB- T -RRB- found in DNA .
Notice that in RNA , uracil replaces thymine .
So DNA needs a messenger to bring its instructions to a ribosome located outside of the nucleus .
DNA sends out a message , in the form of RNA -LRB- ribonucleic acid -RRB- , describing how to make the protein .
There are three types of RNA directly involved in protein synthesis : Messenger RNA -LRB- mRNA -RRB- carries the instructions from the nucleus to the cytoplasm .
mRNA is produced in the nucleus , as are all RNAs .
The other two forms of RNA , ribosomal RNA -LRB- rRNA -RRB- and transfer RNA -LRB- tRNA -RRB- , are involved in the process of ordering the amino acids to make the protein .
rRNA becomes part of the ribosome , which is the site of protein synthesis , and tRNA brings an amino acid to the ribosome so it can be added to a growing chain during protein synthesis .
The amino acid actually attaches to the tRNA during this process .
This informal term describes animals -LRB- usually invertebrates -RRB- that have long bodies with no arms or legs .
The mouth has either three or six lips arranged around the mouth opening , which often have a series of teeth on their inner edges .
Worms with round , non-segmented bodies are known as nematodes or roundworms -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Some scientists believe there could be over a million species of Nematodes .
The smallest nematodes are microscopic , while free-living species can reach as much as 5 cm , and some parasitic species are larger still , reaching over a meter in length .
The worm body is often covered with ridges , rings , bristles , or other distinctive structures .
The head is covered with sensory bristles and , in many cases , solid `` head-shields '' around the mouth region .
There are four nerves that run the length of the body and are connected from the top to the bottom of the body .
At the anterior end of the animal -LRB- the head region -RRB- , the nerves branch from a circular ring which serves as the brain .
The head of a nematode has a few tiny sense organs , including chemoreceptors , which sense chemicals .
A roundworm has a complete digestive system , which includes both a mouth and an anus .
The roundworm digestive system also include a large digestive organ known as the gut .
Digestive enzymes that start to break down food are produced here .
There is no stomach , but there is an intestine which produces enzymes that help absorb nutrients .
The last portion of the intestine forms a rectum , which expels waste through the anus .
Roundworms can be free-living organisms , but they are probably best known for their role as significant plant and animal parasites .
Heartworms , which cause serious disease in dogs while living in the heart and blood vessels , are a type of roundworm .
Roundworms can also cause disease in humans .
Elephantiasis , a disease characterized by the extreme swelling of the limbs -LRB- Figure Most parasitic roundworm eggs or larvae are found in the soil and enter the human body when a person picks them up on the hands and then transfers them to the mouth .
The eggs or larvae also can enter the human body directly through the skin .
The best solution to these diseases is to try to prevent these diseases rather than treat or cure them .
Diseases caused by roundworms are more common in developing countries .
Many parasitic diseases caused by roundworms result from poor personal hygiene .
Contributing factors may include lack of a clean water supply , inadequate sanitation measures , crowded living conditions , combined with a lack of access to health care and low levels of education .
There are actually many types of worms , including flatworms , roundworms , and segmented worms .
These worms are known as the segmented worms because their bodies are segmented , or separated into repeating units .
Leeches -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , however , can live in fresh water and suck blood from their animal host .
Earthworms support terrestrial ecosystems both as prey and by aerating and enriching soil .
The circulatory system consists of paired hearts and blood vessels .
Actually there are five pairs of hearts that pump blood along the two main vessels .
And the nervous system consists of the brain and a ventral nerve cord .
The basic form consists of multiple segments , each of which has the same sets of organs and , in most , a pair of parapodia that many species use for locomotion .
Segmented worms have a well-developed body cavity filled with fluid .
This fluid-filled cavity serves as a hydroskeleton , a supportive structure that helps move the worms muscles .
Only the most primitive worms -LRB- the flatworms -RRB- lack a body cavity .
Segmented worms also tend to have organ systems that are more developed than the roundworms or flat - worms .
The following table compares the three worm phyla -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- .
This 50:50 chance occurs for each baby .
One special pattern of inheritance that doesnt fit Mendels rules is sex-linked inheritance , referring to the inher - itance of traits that are located on genes on the sex chromosomes .
Since males and females do not have the same sex chromosomes , there will be differences between the sexes in how these sex-linked traitstraits linked to genes located on the sex chromosomesare expressed .
Sex-linked traits usually refer to traits due to genes on the X chromosome .
People with this type of colorblindness can not tell the difference between red and green .
Boys only have one X chromosome , so if that chromosome carries the gene for colorblindness , they will be colorblind .
Females with one colorblindness allele and one normal allele are referred to as carriers .
How would a female become colorblind ?
She would have to inherit two genes for colorblindness , which is very unlikely .
Many sex-linked traits are inherited in a recessive manner .
Xc Xc X -LRB- carrier female -RRB- Xc Y -LRB- colorblind male -RRB- X Y X XX -LRB- normal female -RRB- XY -LRB- normal male -RRB- According to this Punnett square -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- , the son of a woman who carries the colorblindness trait and a male with normal vision has a 50 % chance of being colorblind .
If a baby inherits an X chromosome from the father and an X chromosome from the mother , what will be the childs sex ?
If the fathers sperm carries the Y chromosome , the child will be male .
Notice that a mother can only pass on an X chromosome , so the sex of the baby is determined by the father .
The father has a 50 percent chance of passing on the Y or X chromosome , so there is a 50 percent chance that a child will be male , and there is a 50 percent chance a child will be female .
A sexually transmitted infection -LRB- STI -RRB- is an infection that spreads through sexual contact .
STIs are caused by pathogens , a living thing or virus that causes infection .
Getting STIs is no big deal , because STIs can be cured with medicine .
Fact The only way to avoid the risk of STIs is to practice abstinence from sexual activity .
Many STIs do not cause symptoms , especially in fe - males .
Only some STIs can be cured with medicine ; other STIs can not be cured .
Most STIs are caused by bacteria or viruses .
STIs caused by bacteria usually can be cured with drugs called antibiotics .
Therefore , STIs caused by viruses are not treated with antibiotics .
Other drugs may be used to help control the symptoms of viral STIs , but they can not be cured .
The pathogens enter the body through the reproductive organs .
Many STIs also spread through body fluids , such as blood .
For example , a shared tattoo needle is one way an STI could spread .
Some STIs can also spread from a mother to her baby during childbirth .
One reason is that young people are more likely to take risks .
In the U.S. , chlamydia is the most common STI caused by bacteria .
Females are more likely than males to develop the infection .
These infections may leave a woman unable to have children .
Gonorrhea may cause pain during urination .
This can happen in males as well as females .
Rates of chlamydia among U.S. females in 2006 are shown below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Syphilis usually begins with a small sore on the genitals .
If syphilis is not treated , it may damage the heart , brain , and other organs .
Chlamydia may cause a burning feeling during urination .
As a result , people do not know they are infected , so they dont go to the doctor for help .
If chlamydia goes untreated , it may cause more serious problems in females .
Genital warts are an STI caused by human papilloma virus , or HPV .
But drugs can help prevent or shorten outbreaks .
Researchers are trying to find a vaccine to prevent genital herpes .
It is caused by a virus called hepatitis B , which can be passed through sexual activity .
Hepatitis B causes vomiting .
The disease goes away on its own in some people .
In these people , the virus usually damages the liver .
Medicines can help prevent liver damage in these people .
There is also a vaccine to protect against hepatitis B. HIV stands for `` human immunodeficiency virus . ''
It is the virus that causes AIDS .
HIV and AIDS are described in a previous concept .
HIV can spread through sexual contact .
There is no cure for HIV infection , and AIDS can cause death , although AIDS can be delayed for several years with medication .
Researchers are trying to find a vaccine to prevent HIV infection .
But a new vaccine called Gardasil can prevent most HPV infections in females .
Many doctors recommend that females between the ages of 9 and 26 years receive the vaccine .
Preventing HPV infections in females is important because HPV can also cause cancer of the cervix .
A related herpes virus causes cold sores on the lips -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Both viruses cause painful blisters .
The blisters go away on their own , but the virus remains in the body .
Fixed joints do not allow any movement of the bones , which protects the brain from injury .
Movable joints allow the most movement .
Your fingers , toes , hips , elbows , and knees all provide examples of movable joints .
The surfaces of bones at movable joints are covered with a smooth layer of cartilage .
The cartilage reduces friction between the bones .
Ligaments often cross a joint , holding two nones together .
For example , there are numerous ligaments connecting the leg bones across the knee joint .
Fixed joints do not allow any bone movement .
Many of the joints in your skull are fixed -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
There are eight bones that fuse together to form the cranium .
The joints between these bones do not allow movement , which helps protect the brain .
Partly movable joints allow only a little movement .
The skull has fixed joints .
Four types of movable joints are discussed here .
A gliding joint is a joint which allows only gliding movement .
The gliding joint allows one bone to slide over the other .
The gliding joint in your wrist allows you to flex your wrist .
Exam - ples of a ball-and-socket joint include the hip -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- and the shoulder .
In a hinge joint , the ends of the bones are shaped in a way that allows motion in two directions , forward and backward .
An example of a pivot joint is the joint between the radius and ulna that allows you to turn the palm of your hand up and down .
Did you know that you see the largest organ in your body every day ?
The integumentary system is made up of your skin , hair , and nails .
Skin acts as a barrier that stops water and other things , like soap and dirt , from getting into your body .
The skin : Provides a barrier .
A pigment called melanin blocks sunlight from getting to deeper layers of skin cells , which are easily damaged by sunlight .
It keeps organisms that could harm the body out .
It stops water from entering or leaving the body .
It does this by making sweat -LRB- or perspiration -RRB- , a watery substance that cools the body when it evaporates .
Helps the body get rid of some types of waste , which are removed in sweat .
Your skin is always exposed to your external environment , so it gets cut , scratched , and worn down .
Your body replaces damaged or missing skin cells by growing more of them .
As the dead cells are shed or removed from the upper layer , they are replaced by the skin cells below them .
Two different layers make up the skin : the epidermis and the dermis -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
A fatty layer lies under the dermis , but it is not part of your skin .
Although the top layer of epidermis is only about as thick as a sheet of paper , it is made up of 25 to 30 layers of cells .
The epidermis also contains cells that produce melanin .
Melanin is the brownish pigment that gives skin and hair their color .
Melanin-producing cells are found in the bottom layer of the epidermis .
The lower part of the epidermis receives blood by diffusion from blood vessels of the dermis .
Skin is made up of two layers , the epider - mis on top and the dermis below .
The tissue below the dermis is called the hy - podermis , but it is not part of the skin .
The dermis contains hair follicles , sweat glands , oil glands , and blood vessels -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Do you ever notice how your hair stands up when you are cold or afraid ?
Tiny muscles in the dermis pull on hair follicles which cause hair to stand up .
The resulting little bumps in the skin are commonly called `` goosebumps '' -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Glands and hair follicles open out into the epidermis , but they start in the dermis .
Oil glands -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- release , or secrete an oily substance , called sebum , into the hair follicle .
Evaporation of sweat from the skin surface helps to lower skin temperature .
The skin also releases excess water , salts , sugars , and other wastes , such as ammonia and urea , in sweat .
Goosebumps are caused by tiny mus - cles in the dermis that pull on hair folli - cles , which causes the hairs to stand up straight .
Sebum waterproofs hair and the skin surface to prevent them from drying out .
It can also stop the growth of bacteria on the skin .
It is odorless , but the breakdown of sebum by bacteria can cause odors .
If an oil gland becomes plugged and infected , it develops into a pimple .
Up to 85 % of teenagers get pimples , which usually go away by adulthood .
Frequent washing can help decrease the amount of sebum on the skin .
The muscular system consists of all the muscles in the body .
This is the body system that allows us to move .
However , certain muscle movements happen without you thinking about them .
Muscles that are under your conscious control are called voluntary muscles .
Muscles that are not under your conscious control are called involuntary muscles .
Muscle tissue is one of the four types of tissue found in animals .
Skeletal muscle is made up of voluntary muscles , usually attached to the skeleton .
Skeletal muscles move the body .
For example , you can choose to move your arm , but your arm would move automatically if you were to burn your finger on a stove top .
This voluntary contraction begins with a thought process .
A signal from your brain tells your muscles to contract or relax .
Quickly contract and relax the muscles in your fingers a few times .
Think about how quickly these signals must travel throughout your body to make this happen .
Smooth muscle is composed of involuntary muscles found within the walls of organs and structures such as the esophagus , stomach , intestines , and blood vessels .
These muscles push materials like food or blood through organs .
Cardiac muscle is also an involuntary muscle , found only in the heart .
The cardiac muscle fibers all contract together , generating enough force to push blood throughout the body .
Each muscle in the body is made up of cells called muscle fibers .
Muscle fibers are long , thin cells that can do something that other cells can not dothey are able to get shorter .
Shortening of muscle fibers is called contraction .
Muscle fibers can contract because they are made of proteins , called actin and myosin , that form long filaments -LRB- or fibers -RRB- .
When muscles contract , these protein filaments slide or glide past one another , shortening the length of the cell .
When your muscles relax , the length extends back to the previous position .
Water pollution is a serious issue facing hundreds of millions of people world-wide , having harmful effects on the lives of those people .
This water is cleaned somewhat by exposure to sunlight , aeration , and microorganisms in the water .
Groundwater -LRB- private wells and some public water supplies -RRB- generally takes longer to become contaminated , but the natural clean - ing process also may take much longer .
Groundwater can be contaminated by disease-producing pathogens , careless disposal of hazardous household chemical-containing products , agricultural chemicals , and leaking underground storage tanks .
Water pollution can cause harmful effects to ecology and human health .
Shown is the pollution in Jakarta , Indonesia .
Natural events , like storms , volcanic eruptions and earthquakes can cause major changes in water quality .
Water is considered polluted either when it does not support a human use , like clean drinking water , or a use for other animals and plants .
The overgrowth of algae , known as an algal bloom , can result from the runoff of fertilizer into bodies of water .
This excess of nutrients allows the algae to grow beyond control , bring harm to the rest of the ecosystem .
The main sources of water pollution can be grouped into two categories : Point source pollution results from the contaminants that enter a waterway or water body through a single site .
Examples of this include untreated sewage , wastewater from a sewage treatment plant , and leaking underground tanks .
Nonpoint source pollution is contamination that does not come from a single point source .
Instead , it happens when there is a buildup of small amounts of contaminants that collect from a large area .
Examples of this include fertilizer runoff from many farms flowing into groundwater or streams .
Water pollution happens when contaminants enter water bodies .
Contaminants are any substances that harm the health of the environment or humans .
Most contaminants enter the water because of humans .
Surface water -LRB- river or lake -RRB- can be exposed to and contaminated by acid rain , storm water runoff , pesticide runoff , and industrial waste .
Though this doesnt usually happen , it could provide clues about diseases of the nervous system .
Genetic differences in taste could help predict what we eat , how well our metabolism works , and even whether or not were overweight .
These two senses actually work together to provide some of the basic sensations of everyday life .
Your sense of taste is controlled by sensory neurons , or nerve cells , on your tongue that sense the chemicals in food .
The neurons are grouped in bundles within taste buds .
The use of salt can donate the sodium ion producing this taste .
Sour , which is the taste that detects acidity .
The most common food group that contains naturally sour foods is fruit , such as lemon , grape , orange , and sometimes melon .
Children show a greater enjoyment of sour flavors than adults , and sour candy such as Lemon Drops , Shock Tarts and sour versions of Skittles and Starburst , is popular .
Many of these candies contain citric acid .
Each taste bud actually has a pore that opens out to the surface of the tongue enabling molecules and ions taken into the mouth to reach the receptor cells inside .
This taste can be found in fish , shellfish , cured meats , mushrooms , cheese , tomatoes , grains , and beans .
A single taste bud contains 50100 taste cells representing all 5 taste sensations .
A stimulated taste receptor cell triggers action potentials in a nearby sensory neuron , which send messages to the brain about the taste .
The brain then decides what tastes you are sensing .
Each type detects a different taste .
Sweet , which is produced by the presence of sugars , such as the common table sugar sucrose , and a few other substances .
Salty , which is produced primarily by the presence of sodium ions .
Your sense of smell also involves sensory neurons that sense chemicals .
The neurons are found in the nose , and they detect chemicals in the air .
So an odor similar to that of your grandmothers kitchen or pantry might be more quickly associated with your memories of that place than a similar sight , which might be more generalized .
Unlike taste neurons , which can detect only five different tastes , the sensory neurons in the nose can detect thousands of different odors .
Thats because your sense of smell greatly affects your ability to taste food .
As you eat , molecules of food chemicals enter your nose -LRB- actually your nasal cavity -RRB- .
Being able to smell as well as taste food greatly increases the number of different flavors you are able to sense .
Specific scents are often associated with our memories of places and events .
Carbon is also returned to the atmosphere by the burning of organic matter -LRB- combustion -RRB- and fossil fuels and decomposition of organic matter .
When organic matter is under pressure for millions of years , it forms fossil fuels .
Like water and carbon , nitrogen is also repeatedly recycled through the biosphere .
This process is called the nitrogen cycle .
Lightning : When lightening strikes , nitrogen gas is transformed into nitrate -LRB- NO3 -RRB- that plants can use .
These bacteria live in the roots of plants in the pea family .
Ammonium can be used by aquatic plants as a source of nitrogen .
Nitrogen also is released to the environment by decaying organisms or decaying wastes .
These wastes release nitrogen in the form of ammonium .
Ammonium in the soil can be turned into nitrate by a two-step process completed by two different types of bacteria .
In the form of nitrate , nitrogen can be used by plants through the process of assimilation .
It is then passed along to animals when they eat the plants .
The air that we breathe is mostly nitrogen gas -LRB- N2 -RRB- , but , unfortunately , animals and plants can not use the nitrogen when it is a gas .
In fact , plants often die from a lack of nitrogen even through they are surrounded by plenty of nitrogen gas .
Nitrogen gas -LRB- N2 -RRB- has two nitrogen atoms connected by a very strong triple bond .
Most plants and animals can not use the nitrogen in nitrogen gas because they can not break that triple bond .
In order for plants to make use of nitrogen , it must be transformed into molecules they can use .
This can be accomplished several different ways -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Turning nitrate back into nitrogen gas , the process of denitrification , happens through the work of denitrifying bacteria .
These bacteria often live in swamps and lakes .
They take in the nitrate and release it back to the atmosphere as nitrogen gas .
Just like the carbon cycle , human activities impact the nitrogen cycle .
These human activities include the burning of fossil fuels , which release nitrogen oxide gasses into the atmosphere .
Releasing nitrogen oxide back into the atmosphere leads to problems like acid rain .
Whereas energy flows through an ecosystem , water and elements like carbon and nitrogen are recycled .
Water and nutrients are constantly being recycled through the environment .
Many organisms contain a large amount of water in their bodies , and many live in water , so the water cycle is essential to life on Earth .
Water continuously moves between living organisms , such as plants , and non-living things , such as clouds , rivers , and oceans -LRB- Figure The water cycle does not have a real starting or ending point .
It is an endless recycling process that involves the oceans , lakes and other bodies of water , as well as the land surfaces and the atmosphere .
The steps in the water cycle are as follows , starting with the water in the oceans : 1 .
Water evaporates from the surface of the oceans , leaving behind salts .
As the water vapor rises , it collects and is stored in clouds .
As water cools in the clouds , condensation occurs .
This process through which water or a chemical element is continuously recycled in an ecosystem is called a biogeochemical cycle .
Condensation creates precipitation .
Precipitation includes rain , snow , hail , and sleet .
The precipitation allows the water to return again to the Earths surface .
When precipitation lands on land , the water can sink into the ground to become part of our underground water reserves , also known as groundwater .
Much of this underground water is stored in aquifers , which are porous layers of rock that can hold water .
This recycling process involves both the living organisms -LRB- biotic components -RRB- and nonliving things -LRB- abiotic factors -RRB- in the ecosystem .
The biogeochemical cycle that recycles water is the water cycle .
The water cycle involves a series of interconnected pathways involving both the biotic and abiotic components of the biosphere .
Life can not exist without water .
Most precipitation that occurs over land , however , is not absorbed by the soil and is called runoff .
This runoff collects in streams and rivers and eventually flows back into the ocean .
Water also moves through the living organisms in an ecosystem .
Plants soak up large amounts of water through their roots .
The water then moves up the plant and evaporates from the leaves in a process called transpiration .
For life to evolve from simple single-celled organisms to many millions of species of prokaryotic species to simple eukaryotic species to all the protists , fungi , plants , and animals , took some time .
This supported the idea of an older Earth .
These tiny crystals were found in Australia .
How did life begin on Earth ?
These questions have fascinated scientists for centuries .
During the 1800s , geologists , paleontologists , and naturalists found several forms of physical evidence that confirmed that Earth is very old .
The evidence includes : Fossils of ancient sea life on dry land far from oceans .
This supported the idea that the Earth changed over time and that some dry land today was once covered by oceans .
When people realized that rock layers represent the order in which rocks and fossils appeared , they were able to trace the history of Earth and life on Earth .
Indications that volcanic eruptions , earthquakes , and erosion that happened long ago shaped much of the Earths surface .
Geologists and other Earth scientists use geologic time scales to describe when events happened in the history of Earth .
The time scales can be used to show when both geologic events and events affecting plant and animal life occurred .
The geologic time scale pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- illustrates the timing of events like : Earthquakes .
Meteorites hitting Earth .
Life on Earth began about 3.5 to 4 billion years ago .
As it is difficult to identify , observe and study such small forms of life , most of these organisms remain unknown to scientists .
Advancing technologies , however , do allow for the identification and study of such organisms .
Fossils indicate that many organisms that lived long ago are extinct .
Extinction of species is common ; in fact , it is estimated that 99 % of the species that have ever lived on Earth no longer exist .
The basic timeline of a 4.6 billion-year-old Earth includes the following : About 3.5 - 3.8 billion years of simple cells -LRB- prokaryotes -RRB- .
These first life forms were , of course , very basic , and this then allowed for the evolution of more complex life forms .
The first multicellular organisms did not appear until about 610 million years ago .
Many different types of organisms evolved during the next ten million years , in an event called the Cambrian Explosion .
This sudden burst of evolution may have been caused by some environmental changes that made the Earths environment more suitable for a wider variety of life forms .
Plants and fungi did not appear until roughly 500 million years ago .
Next came the amphibians about 300 million years ago , followed by mammals around 200 million years ago and birds around 100 million years ago .
When you look at the prickly cactus pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- , does the word `` ouch '' come to mind ?
Neurons in the skin on your foot would sense the temperature of the water and send a message about it to your central nervous system .
The frontal lobe of the cerebrum would process the information .
It might decide that the water is really cold and send a message to your muscles to pull your foot out of the water .
Instead , they travel only as far as the spinal cord , and the spinal cord responds to the messages by giving orders to the muscles .
This allows you to respond to pain more quickly .
When messages avoid the brain in this way , it forms a reflex arc , like the one shown below -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Touch depends on sensory neurons , or nerve cells , in the skin .
Neurons that sense pain are also found inside the body in muscles , joints , and organs .
If you have a stomach ache or pain from a sprained ankle , its because of these sensory neurons found inside of your body .
The following example shows how messages about touch travel from sensory neurons to the brain , as well as how the brain responds to the messages .
Our sense of touch is controlled by a huge network of nerve endings and touch receptors .
This system is responsible for all the sensations we feel , including cold , hot , smooth , rough , pressure , tickle , itch , pain , vibrations , and more .
Proprioceptors detect the position of different parts of the body in relation to each other and the surrounding environment .
These receptors are found in joints , tendons and muscles , and allow us to do fundamental things such as feeding or clothing ourselves .
Mechanoreceptors perceive sensations such as pressure , vibrations , and texture .
Your brain gets an enormous amount of information about the texture of objects through your fingertips because the ridges that make up your fingerprints are full of these sensitive receptors .
Thermoreceptors perceive sensations related to the temperature of objects .
The highest concentration of thermoreceptors can be found in the face and ears .
Pain receptors , or nociceptor detect pain or stimuli that can or does cause damage to the skin and other tissues of the body .
There are over three million pain receptors throughout the body , found in skin , muscles , bones , blood vessels , and some organs .
Proteins are made on ribosomes in the cytoplasm .
For example , a DNA sequence ACGGGTAAGG will be transcribed into the mRNA sequence UGCCCAUUCC .
In this manner , the information of the DNA is passed on to the mRNA .
The mRNA will carry this code to the ribosomes to tell them how to make a protein .
As not all genes are used in every cell , a gene must be `` turned on '' or expressed when the gene product is needed by the cell .
Only the information in a gene that is being expressed is transcribed into an mRNA .
Transcription is when RNA is created from a DNA template .
Each gene -LRB- a -RRB- contains triplets of bases -LRB- b -RRB- that are transcribed into RNA -LRB- c -RRB- .
Every triplet in the DNA , or codon in the mRNA , encodes for a unique amino acid .
Base-pairing ensures the accuracy of transcription .
Notice how the helix must unwind for transcription to take place .
Remember that information in a gene is converted into mRNA , which carries the information to the ribosome .
The new mRNA is shown in green .
In the nucleus , mRNA is created by using the DNA in a gene as a template .
A template is a model provided for others to copy .
In transcription , only one strand of DNA is used as a template .
First , the double helix of DNA unwinds and an enzyme , RNA Polymerase , builds the mRNA using the DNA as a template .
The nucleotides follow basically the same base pairing rules as in DNA to form the correct sequence in the mRNA .
The mRNA , which is transcribed from the DNA in the nucleus , carries the directions for the protein-making process .
mRNA tells the ribosome -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- how to create a specific protein .
The genetic code in mRNA is read in words of three letters -LRB- triplets -RRB- , called codons .
There are 20 amino acids used to make proteins , and different codons code for different amino acids .
tRNA reads the mRNA code and brings a specific amino acid to attach to the growing chain of amino acids .
The anticodon on the tRNA binds to the codon on the mRNA .
Each tRNA carries only one type of amino acid and only recognizes one specific codon .
For example , a GGC anticodon will bind to a CCG codon , and a CGA anticodon will bind to a GCU codon .
tRNA is released from the amino acid .
Three codons , UGA , UAA , and UAG , indicate that the protein should stop adding amino acids .
Ribosomes translate RNA into a protein with a specific amino acid sequence .
Once tRNA comes to a stop codon , the protein is set free from the ribosome .
The following chart -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- is used to determine which amino acids correspond to which codons .
The tRNA binds and brings to the ribosome the amino acid encoded by the mRNA .
The process of reading the mRNA code in the ribosome to make a protein is called translation -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- : the mRNA is translated from the language of nucleic acids -LRB- nucleotides -RRB- to the language of proteins -LRB- amino acids -RRB- .
Sets of three bases , called codons , are read in the ribosome , the organelle responsible for making proteins .
This summary of how genes are ex - pressed shows that DNA is transcribed into RNA , which is translated , in turn , to protein .
The one letter code represents amino acids .
The following are the steps involved in translation : mRNA travels to the ribosome from the nucleus .
The following steps occur in the ribosome : The base code in the mRNA determines the order of the amino acids in the protein .
The echinoderms can be divided into two major groups : 1 .
This group includes the starfish and most other echinoderms .
This group includes crinoids , such as the feather stars .
Listed below are the four main classes of echinoderms present in the Eleutherozoa Group -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- .
Bottom feeders with long , narrow , flexible arms that allow relatively fast movement .
Have movable spines which are used for movement , defense , and sensing the environment .
Echinoderms are spread all over the world at almost all depths , latitudes , and environments in the ocean .
Most feather stars -LRB- crinoids -RRB- live in shallow water .
In the deep ocean , sea cucumbers are common , sometimes making up 90 % of the organisms .
Most echinoderms , however , are found in reefs just lying beneath the surface of the water .
No echinoderms are found in freshwater habitats or on land .
This makes Echinodermata the largest animal phylum to only have ocean-based species .
While almost all echinoderms live on the sea floor , some sea-lilies can swim at great speeds for brief periods of time , and a few sea cucumbers are fully floating .
Some echinoderms find other ways of moving .
For example , crinoids attach themselves to floating logs , and some sea cucumbers move by attaching to the sides of fish .
On the underside side of a sea star , there are hundreds of tiny feet usually arranged into several rows on each ray of the star .
These are called tube feet , or podia , and are filled with seawater in most echinoderms .
The water vascular system within the body of the animal is also filled with seawater .
By expanding and contracting chambers within the water vascular system , the echinoderm can force water into certain tube feet to extend them .
The animal has muscles in the tube feet , which are used to retract them .
By expanding and retracting the right tube feet in the proper order , the animal can walk .
How do sea cucumbers eat ?
Carbohydrates , proteins , and lipids contain energy .
When your body digests food , it breaks down the molecules of these nutrients .
This releases the energy so your body can use it .
Carbohydrates are nutrients that include sugars , starches , and fiber .
Pictured below are some foods that are good sources of carbohydrates -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Sugars are small , simple carbohydrates that are found in foods such as fruits and milk .
The sugar found in fruits is called fructose .
As animals can not photosynthesize , they must eat to obtain carbohydrates .
Through the process of cellular respiration , glucose is converted by cells into energy that is usable by the cell -LRB- ATP -RRB- .
The sugar found in milk is called lactose .
These sugars are broken down by the body to form glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- , the simplest sugar of all .
Recall that glucose is the product of photosynthesis , so some organisms such as plants are able to make their own glucose .
Starch is a large , complex carbohydrate made of thousands of glucose units -LRB- monomers -RRB- joined together .
Starches are found in foods such as vegetables and grains .
Some examples are pictured below -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Starches are broken down by the body into sugars that provide energy .
For example , fiber is important for maintaining the health of your gastrointestinal tract .
Eating foods high in fiber also helps fill you up without providing too many calories .
Recall that there are 20 different amino acids arranged like `` beads on a string '' to form proteins .
These amino acid chains then fold up into a three - dimensional molecule , giving the protein a specific function .
For example , proteins make up antibodies , muscle fibers and enzymes that help control cell and body processes .
You need to make sure you have enough protein in your diet to obtain the necessary amino acids to make your proteins .
Between the ages of 9 and 13 years , girls need about 26 grams of fiber per day , and boys need about 31 grams of fiber per day .
If you eat more than you need for these purposes , the extra protein is used for energy .
So even though these foods are good sources of proteins , they should be eaten in limited amounts .
Saturated lipids increase cholesterol levels in the blood .
Too much cholesterol in the blood Another type of lipid is called trans fat .
Trans fats are manufactured and added to certain foods to keep them fresher for longer .
Foods that contain trans fats include cakes , cookies , fried foods , and margarine .
For example , lipids protect nerves and make up the membranes that surround cells .
Eating foods that contain trans fats increases the risk of heart disease .
Beginning with Denmark in 2003 , many nations now limit the amount of trans fat that can be in food products or ban these products all together .
On January 1 , 2008 , Calgary became the first city in Canada to ban trans fats from restaurants and fast food chains .
Beginning in 2010 , California banned trans fats from restaurant products , and in 2011 , from all retail baked goods .
Stored fat gives your body energy to use for later .
Stored fat also cushions and protects internal organs .
It helps keep you warm in cold weather .
Sometimes , the urinary system -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- is called the excretory system .
Recall that the excretory system is also made up of the skin , lungs , and large intestine , as well as the kidneys .
The urinary system is the organ system that makes , stores , and gets rid of urine .
The kidneys filter the blood that passes through them , and the urinary bladder stores the urine until it is released from the body .
Ureters are tube-shaped and bring urine from the kidneys to the urinary bladder .
It is the organ that collects urine .
Urine is a liquid that is formed by the kidneys when they filter wastes from the blood .
Urine contains mostly water , but it also contains salts and nitrogen-containing molecules .
The amount of urine released from the body depends on many things .
Some of these include the amount of fluid and food a person consumes and how much fluid they have lost from sweating and breathing .
Light yellow urine contains mostly water .
The darker the urine , the less water it contains .
The urinary system also removes a type of waste called urea from your blood .
Urea is a nitrogen-containing molecule that is made when foods containing protein , such as meat , poultry , and certain vegetables , are broken down in the body .
Urea and other wastes are carried in the bloodstream to the kidneys , where they are removed and form urine .
Myopia is also called nearsightedness .
If one or both of your parents need glasses , there is an increased chance that you will too .
Individuals who spend a lot of time reading , working or playing at a computer , or doing other close visual work may also be more likely to develop nearsightedness .
Because the eye continues to grow during childhood , myopia typically progresses until On the left , you can see how a person with normal vision sees two boys .
The right image shows how a person with myopia sees the boys .
As a result , images are focused in front of the retina -LRB- top left -RRB- .
A concave lens is used to correct myopia to help focus images on the retina -LRB- top right -RRB- .
Farsightedness , or hyperopia , oc - curs when objects are focused in back of the retina -LRB- bottom left -RRB- .
However , nearsightedness may also develop in adults due to visual stress or health conditions such as diabetes .
Eyeglasses or contact lenses can easily help with myopia .
Depending on the amount of myopia , you may only need to wear glasses or contact lenses for certain activities , like watching a movie or driving a car .
Or , if you are very nearsighted , they may need to be worn all the time .
The picture below shows how a person with myopia might see two boys that are a few meters away -LRB- Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Below , you can see how images are focused on the retina of someone with myopia -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Myopia is corrected with a concave lens , which curves inward like the inside of a bowl .
The lens changes the focus , so images fall on the retina as they should .
Farsightedness is also known as hyperopia .
This results in images being focused in back of the retina -LRB- Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Hyperopia is corrected with a convex lens , which curves outward like the outside of a bowl .
The lens changes the focus so that images fall on the retina as they should .
Common signs of farsightedness include difficulty in concentrating and maintaining a clear focus on close objects , eye strain , fatigue and headaches after close work , and aching or burning eyes , especially after intense concentration on close work .
In addition to lenses , many cases of myopia and hyperopia can be corrected with surgery .
For example , a procedure called LASIK -LRB- Laser-Assisted in situ Keratomileusis -RRB- uses a laser to permanently change the shape of the cornea so light is correctly focused on the retina .
Vitamins are organic compounds that the body needs in small amounts to function properly .
Humans need 13 different vitamins .
Vitamins B12 and K are produced by bacteria that normally live inside the body .
Most other vitamins must come from foods .
Foods that are good sources of vitamins include whole grains , vegetables , fruits , and milk -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- .
For example , too little vitamin C causes a disease called scurvy .
People with scurvy have bleeding gums , nosebleeds , and other symptoms .
Some of them are listed below -LRB- Table 1.1 -RRB- .
The table also shows how much of each vitamin you need every day .
For example , Vitamin A helps maintain good vision .
Vitamin B9 helps form red blood cells .
Vitamin K is needed for blood to clot when you have a cut or other wound .
Vitamin Necessary for Available from Daily Amount Required -LRB- at ages 913 years -RRB- Vitamin Necessary for Available from A Good vision B1 Healthy nerves B3 Healthy skin and nerves B9 Red blood cells B12 Healthy nerves C Growth and repair of tis - sues Healthy bones and teeth Blood to clot Carrots , spinach , milk , eggs Whole wheat , peas , meat , beans , fish , peanuts Beets , liver , pork , turkey , fish , peanuts Liver , peas , dried beans , leafy green vegetables Meat , liver , milk , shell - fish , eggs Oranges , grapefruits , red peppers , broccoli Milk , salmon , tuna , eggs Spinach , brussels sprouts , milk , eggs D K Daily Amount Required -LRB- at ages 913 years -RRB- 600 g -LRB- 1 g = 1 106 g -RRB- 0.9 mg -LRB- 1 mg = 1 103 g -RRB- 12 mg 300 g 1.8 g 45 mg 5 g 60 g Some vitamins are produced in the body .
For example , vitamin D is made in the skin when it is exposed to sunlight .
Minerals are chemical elements that are needed for body processes .
Minerals that you need in relatively large amounts are listed below -LRB- Table 1.2 -RRB- .
For example , too little calcium may cause osteoporosis .
This is a disease in which bones become soft and break easily .
Too much sodium causes high blood pressure in some people .
Minerals that you need in smaller amounts include iodine , iron , and zinc .
For example , calcium and phosphorus are needed for strong bones and teeth .
Potassium and sodium are needed for muscles and nerves to work normally .
Mineral Necessary for Available from Calcium Strong bones and teeth Chloride Magnesium Proper balance of water and salts in body Strong bones Phosphorus Strong bones and teeth Potassium Muscles and nerves to work normally Muscles and nerves to work normally Milk , soy milk , leafy green vegetables Table salt , most packaged foods Whole grains , leafy green vegetables , nuts Meat , poultry , whole grains Meats , grains , bananas , orange juice Table salt , most packaged foods Sodium Daily Amount Required -LRB- at ages 913 years -RRB- 1,300 mg 2.3 g 240 mg 1,250 mg 4.5 g 1.5 g Your body can not produce any of the minerals that it needs .
Good sources of minerals include milk , leafy green vegetables , and whole grains -LRB- Table 1.2 -RRB- .
Not getting enough minerals can cause health problems .
An acid is an ionic compound that produces positive hydrogen ions -LRB- H + -RRB- when dissolved in water .
When it dissolves in water , its hydrogen ions and negative chloride ions -LRB- Cl -RRB- separate , forming hydrochloric acid .
This can be represented by the equation : HCl H2 O + !
Certain compounds , called indicators , change color when acids come into contact with them .
An example of an indicator is a compound called litmus .
If you place a few drops of acid on a strip of blue litmus paper , the paper will turn red .
Litmus isnt the only indicator for detecting acids .
Red cabbage juice also works well , as you can see in this entertaining video : .
For example , sulfuric acid is used to manufacture a variety of different products , including paper , paint , and detergent .
Some other uses of acids are illustrated in Figure 10.7 .
A base is an ionic compound that produces negative hydroxide ions -LRB- OH -RRB- when dissolved in water .
For example , when the compound sodium hydroxide -LRB- NaOH -RRB- dissolves in water , it produces hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions -LRB- Na + -RRB- .
This can be represented by the equation : NaOH H2 O !
Bases change the color of certain compounds , and this property can be used to detect them .
Red cabbage juice can detect bases as well as acids , as youll see by reviewing this video : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Bases are used for a variety of purposes .
For example , soaps contain bases such as potassium hydroxide .
Other uses of bases are pictured in Figure 10.9 .
The acid in vinegar is weak enough to safely eat on a salad .
The base in antacid tablets is weak enough to take for an upset stomach .
The base in drain cleaner is strong enough to cause serious burns .
The strength of an acid depends on the concentration of hydrogen ions it produces when dissolved in water .
A stronger acid produces a greater concentration of ions than a weaker acid .
For example , when hydrogen chloride is added to water , all of it breaks down into H + and Cl ions .
The strength of a base depends on the concentration of hydroxide ions it produces when dissolved in water .
For example , sodium hydroxide completely breaks down into ions in water , so it is a strong base .
The strength of acids and bases is measured on a scale called the pH scale -LRB- see Figure 10.10 -RRB- .
The symbol pH represents acidity , or the concentration of hydrogen ions -LRB- H + -RRB- in a solution .
You can watch a video about the pH scale at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
For example , many plants grow best in soil that has a pH between 6 and 7 .
When acidic rainwater soaks into the ground , it can slowly dissolve rocks , particularly those containing calcium carbonate .
This is how water forms caves , like the one that opened this chapter .
Fish also need a pH close to 7 .
Some air pollutants form acids when dissolved in water droplets in the air .
This results in acid fog and acid rain , which may have a pH of 4 or even lower -LRB- see Figure 10.10 -RRB- .
Figure 10.11 shows the effects of acid fog and acid rain on a forest .
Acid rain also lowers the pH of surface waters such as streams and lakes .
As a result , the water became too acidic for fish and many other water organisms to survive .
Thats because carbon dioxide in the air dissolves in raindrops , producing a weak acid called carbonic acid .
As you read above , an acid produces positive hydrogen ions and a base produces negative hydroxide ions .
If an acid and base react together , the hydrogen and hydroxide ions combine to form water .
A salt is any ionic compound that forms when an acid and base react .
Thats why reactions of acids and bases are called neutralization reactions .
Another example of a neutralization reaction is described in Figure 10.12 .
This is represented by the equation : H + + OH !
H2 O An acid also produces negative ions , and a base also produces positive ions .
For example , the acid hydrogen chloride -LRB- HCl -RRB- , when dissolved in water , produces negative chloride ions -LRB- Cl -RRB- as well as hydrogen ions .
The base sodium hydroxide -LRB- NaOH -RRB- produces positive sodium ions -LRB- Na + -RRB- in addition to hydroxide ions .
These other ions also combine when the acid and base react .
This is represented by the equation : Na + + Cl !
NaCl Sodium chloride is called table salt , but salt is a more general term .
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit , or give off , charged particles and energy from the nucleus .
The charged particles and energy are called by the general term radiation .
Then the atoms become different elements .
-LRB- Be careful not to confuse this radiation with electromagnetic radiation , which has to do with the light given off by atoms as they absorb and then emit energy . -RRB-
Radioactivity was discovered in 1896 by a French physicist named Antoine Henri Becquerel .
Becquerel was experimenting with uranium , which glows after being exposed to sunlight .
However , the day had turned cloudy , so he tucked the plate and uranium in a drawer to try again another day .
He wasnt expecting the uranium to leave an image on the plate without being exposed to sunlight .
Becquerel had discovered that uranium gives off rays without getting energy from light .
To learn more about the importance of Becquerels research , go to this URL : http://nobelprize.org/no Another scientist , who worked with Becquerel , actually came up with the term `` radioactivity . ''
Becquerel wanted to see if the glow was caused by rays of energy , like rays of light and X-rays .
The plate was similar to film thats used today to take X-rays .
As Becquerel predicted , the uranium left an image on the photographic plate .
This meant that uranium gives off rays after being exposed to sunlight .
Becquerel was a good scientist , so he wanted to repeat his experiment to confirm his results .
He placed more uranium on another photographic plate .
A low level of radiation occurs naturally in the environment .
This is called background radiation .
Other sources of radiation are described in the interactive animation at this URL : http : / / w
One source is rocks , which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium .
These are charged particles that arrive on Earth from outer space .
Background radiation is generally considered to be safe for living things .
Radon is a radioactive gas that forms in rocks underground .
You may have seen a sign like the one in Figure 11.3 .
To learn more about the harmful health effects of radiation , go to this URL : .
Nonliving things can also be damaged by radiation .
For example , high levels of radiation can remove electrons from metals .
This may weaken metals in nuclear power plants and space vehicles , both of which are exposed to very high levels of radiation .
Radiation damages living things by knocking electrons out of atoms and changing them to ions .
Radiation also breaks bonds in DNA and other biochemical compounds .
A single large exposure to radiation can burn the skin and cause radiation sickness .
Symptoms of this illness include extreme fatigue , destruction of blood cells , and loss of hair .
Long-term exposure to lower levels of radiation can cause cancer .
For example , radon in buildings can cause lung cancer .
Marie Curie died of cancer , most likely because of exposure to radiation in her research .
One reason radiation is dangerous is that it cant be detected with the senses .
Fortunately , there are devices such as Geiger counters that can detect radiation .
If radiation enters the tube , it turns gas atoms to ions that carry electric current .
The current causes the Geiger counter to click .
Radioactive elements taken up by cancer cells may also be used to kill the cells and treat the disease .
This use of radioactivity is explained in this chapters `` Radioactive Decay '' lesson .
Radioactivity can also be used as a source of power to generate electricity .
This use of radioactivity is covered later on in this chapter in the lesson `` Nuclear Energy . ''
Radioactivity can even be used to diagnose and treat diseases , including cancer .
Cancer cells grow rapidly and take up a lot of glucose for energy .
Glucose containing radioactive elements can be given to patients .
Cancer cells will take up more of the glucose than normal cells do and give off radiation .
In all three types , nuclei emit radiation , but the nature of that radiation differs from one type of decay to another .
The different types of radiation vary in how far they are able to travel and what they can penetrate -LRB- see Figure 11.8 and the URL below -RRB- .
They can be stopped only by several centimeters of lead or several meters of concrete .
URL : Alpha particles can travel only a few centimeters through air .
Beta particles can travel up to a meter through air .
Gamma rays can travel thousands of meters through air .
A radioactive isotope decays at a certain constant rate .
The rate is measured in a unit called the half-life .
Isotope Uranium-238 Potassium-40 Carbon-14 Hydrogen-3 Radon-222 Polonium-214 Half-life 4.47 billion years 1.28 billion years 5,730 years 12.3 years 3.82 days 0.00016 seconds Problem Solving Problem : If you had a gram of carbon-14 , how many years would it take for radioactive decay to reduce it to one-quarter of a gram ?
The concept of half-life is illustrated in Figure 11.9 for the beta decay of phosphorus-32 to sulfur-32 .
After 14 days , half of the original amount of phosphorus-32 has decayed .
After another 14 days , half of the remaining amount -LRB- or one-quarter of the original amount -RRB- has decayed , and so on .
Different radioactive isotopes vary greatly in their rate of decay .
Radioactive isotopes can be used to estimate the ages of fossils and rocks .
The method is called radioactive dating .
It is illustrated in the video at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Carbon-14 forms naturally in Earths atmosphere when cosmic rays strike atoms of nitrogen-14 .
Living things take in and use carbon-14 , just as they do carbon-12 .
However , it is constantly replaced because living things keep taking in carbon-14 .
This is illustrated in the top part of Figure 11.10 .
After organisms die , the carbon-14 they already contain continues to decay , but it is no longer replaced -LRB- see bottom part of Figure 11.10 -RRB- .
If you measure how much carbon - 14 is left in a fossil , you can determine how many half-lives -LRB- and how many years -RRB- have passed since the organism died .
After about 50,000 years , too little carbon-14 is left in a fossil to be measured .
Therefore , carbon-14 dating can only be used to date fossils that are less than 50,000 years old .
Radioisotopes with a longer half-life , such as potassium-40 , must be used to date older fossils and rocks .
This type of reaction releases a great deal of energy from a very small amount of matter .
For example , nuclear fission of a tiny pellet of uranium-235 , like the one pictured in Figure 11.11 , can release as much energy as burning 1,000 kilograms of coal !
Nuclear fission of uranium-235 can be represented by this equation : 235 92 U + 1 141 Neutron ! 92 36 Kr + 56 Ba + 3 Neutrons + Energy As shown in Figure 11.12 , the reaction begins when a nucleus of uranium-235 absorbs a neutron .
This can happen naturally or when a neutron is deliberately crashed into a uranium nucleus in a nuclear power plant .
In either case , the nucleus of uranium becomes very unstable and splits in two .
The reaction also releases three neutrons and a great deal of energy .
The neutrons released in this nuclear fission reaction may be captured by other uranium nuclei and cause them to fission as well .
This can start a nuclear chain reaction -LRB- see Figure 11.13 -RRB- .
In a chain reaction , one fission reaction leads to others , which lead to others , and so on .
If you start one piece of wood burning , enough heat is produced by the burning wood to start the rest of the pile burning without any further help from you .
You can see another example of a chain reaction at this URL :
If a nuclear chain reaction is uncontrolled , it produces a lot of energy all at once .
This is what happens in an atomic bomb .
If a nuclear chain reaction is controlled , it produces energy more slowly .
This is what occurs in a nuclear power plant .
The reaction may be controlled by inserting rods of material that do not undergo fission into the core of fissioning material -LRB- see Figure 11.14 -RRB- .
The radiation from the controlled fission is used to heat water and turn it to steam .
The spinning turbine runs a generator , which produces electricity .
In the U.S. , the majority of electricity is produced by burning coal or other fossil fuels .
This causes air pollution , acid rain , and global warming .
Therefore , used fuel must be stored securely to people and other living things .
On the other hand , nuclear fission does not release air pollution or cause the other environmental problems associated with burning fossil fuels .
This is the major advantage of using nuclear fission as a source of energy .
Accidents at nuclear power plants can release harmful radiation that endangers people and other living things .
Even without accidents , the used fuel that is left after nuclear fission reactions is still radioactive and very dangerous .
In fusion , two or more small nuclei combine to form a single , larger nucleus .
An example is shown in Figure 11.15 .
In this example , two hydrogen nuclei fuse to form a helium nucleus .
Nuclear fusion of hydrogen to form helium occurs naturally in the sun and other stars .
Thats because a great deal of energy is needed to overcome the force of repulsion between positively charged nuclei .
The suns energy comes from fusion in its core , where temperatures reach millions of Kelvin -LRB- see Figure 11.16 -RRB- .
Scientists are searching for ways to create controlled nuclear fusion reactions on Earth .
Scientists are a long way from developing the necessary technology .
One problem is raising temperatures high enough for fusion to take place .
Another problem is that matter this hot exists only in the plasma state .
Thats because plasma consists of ions and responds to magnetism .
How this might work is shown in Figure 11.17 .
Unlike nuclear fission , which involves dangerous radioiso - topes , nuclear fusion involves hydrogen and helium .
The hydrogen in just a gallon of water could produce as much energy by nuclear fusion as burning 1,140 liters -LRB- 300 gallons -RRB- of gasoline !
The hydrogen in the oceans would generate enough energy to supply all the worlds people for a very long time .
Its a simple equation that was derived in 1905 by the physicist Albert Einstein -LRB- see Figure 11.18 -RRB- .
It changed how scientists view two of the most basic concepts in science : matter and energy .
The equation shows that matter and energy are two forms of the same thing .
In addition , Einsteins equation explains why nuclear fission and nuclear fusion produce so much energy .
You can listen to a recording of Einstein explaining his famous equation at this URL :
In Einsteins equation , the variable E stands for energy and the variable m stands for mass .
The speed of light is 300,000 kilometers -LRB- 186,000 miles -RRB- per second , so c2 is a very big number , no matter what units are used to measure it .
Einsteins equation means that the energy in a given amount of matter is equal to its mass times the square of the speed of light .
When the nucleus of a radioisotope undergoes fission or fusion , it loses a tiny amount of mass .
It is more correct to say that the sum of mass and energy is always conserved in a nuclear reaction .
Mass may change to energy , but the amount of mass and energy combined remains the same .
The change in mass is tiny , but it results in a great deal of energy .
Assume that a school bus , like the one in Figure 12.2 , passes by as you stand on the sidewalk .
What is your frame of reference if you are standing on the sidewalk and see the bus go by ?
The video at the URL below illustrates other examples of how frame of reference is related to motion .
If they look only at the other children sitting near them , they will not appear to be moving .
This example shows that how we perceive motion depends on our frame of reference .
Frame of reference refers to something that is not moving with respect to an observer that can be used to detect motion .
For the children on the bus , if they use other children riding the bus as their frame of reference , they do not appear to be moving .
Short distances may be measured in centimeters -LRB- 1 cm = 0.01 m -RRB- .
Long distances may be measured in kilometers -LRB- 1 km = 1000 m -RRB- .
Maps can often be used to measure distance .
Look at the map in Figure 12.4 .
You can use the map key to directly measure the distance between these two points .
Your instantaneous speed would vary throughout the trip .
If the trip took a total of 1.5 hours , your average speed for the trip would be : average speed = 75 mi = 50 mi/h 1.5 h You can see a video about instantaneous and average speed and how to calculate them at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Problem : Terri rode her bike very slowly to the top of a big hill .
It took Terri 15 minutes to make the round trip .
You might come to a complete stop at traffic lights , slow down as you turn corners , and speed up to pass other cars .
The speed of a moving car or other object at a given instant is called its instantaneous speed .
The average speed is the total distance traveled divided by the total time it took to travel that distance .
To calculate the average speed , you can use the general formula for speed that was given above .
The motion of an object can be represented by a distance-time graph like the one in Figure 12.8 .
A distance-time graph shows how the distance from the starting point changes over time .
The graph in Figure 12.8 represents a bike trip .
The trip began at 7:30 AM -LRB- A -RRB- and ended at 12:30 PM -LRB- F -RRB- .
The rider traveled from the starting point to a destination and then returned to the starting point again .
In a distance-time graph , the speed of the object is represented by the slope , or steepness , of the graph line .
The average speed can be calculated from the graph .
The change in distance -LRB- represented by Dd -RRB- divided by the change in time -LRB- represented by Dt -RRB- : speed = Dd Dt For example , the speed between A and B in Figure 12.8 is : speed = Dd 20 km 0 km 20 km = = = 20 km/h Dt 8:30 7:30 h 1h If the graph line is horizontal , as it is between B and C , then the slope and the speed are zero : speed = Dd 20 km 20 km 0 km = = = 0 km/h Dt 9:00 8:30 h 0.5 h You Try It !
To do so , you would use this version of the general speed formula : distance = speed time For example , if a car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for 2 hours , then the distance traveled is : distance = 60 km/h 2 h = 120 km You Try It !
Problem : If Maria runs at a speed of 2 m/s , how far will she run in 60 seconds ?
The opposite occurs when the car slows down , especially if the change in speed is
Acceleration may reflect a change in speed , a change in direction , or both .
Because acceleration includes both a size -LRB- speed -RRB- and direction , it is a vector .
People commonly think of acceleration as an increase in speed , but a decrease in speed is also acceleration .
Negative acceleration may be called deceleration .
Calculating acceleration is complicated if both speed and direction are changing .
Problem : Tranh slowed his skateboard as he approached the street .
To calculate acceleration without a change in direction , you just divide the change in velocity -LRB- represented by Dv -RRB- by the change in time -LRB- represented by Dt -RRB- .
The cyclist in Figure 12.12 speeds up as he goes downhill on this straight trail .
If it takes 5 seconds for him to reach the bottom , what is his acceleration , on average , as he flies down the hill ?
Acceleration = Dv 6 m/s 1 m/s 5 m/s 1 m/s = = = = 1 m/s2 Dt 5s 5s 1m In words , this means that for each second the cyclist travels downhill , his velocity increases by 1 meter per second -LRB- on average -RRB- .
The answer to this problem is expressed in the SI unit for acceleration : m/s2 -LRB- `` meters per second squared '' -RRB- .
The acceleration of an object can be represented by a velocity-time graph like the one in Figure 12.13 .
A velocity - time graph shows how velocity changes over time .
It is similar to a distance-time graph except the y axis represents velocity instead of distance .
The graph in Figure 12.13 represents the velocity of a sprinter on a straight track .
The runner speeds up for the first 4 seconds of the race , then runs at a constant velocity for the next 3 seconds , and finally slows to a stop during the last 3 seconds of the race .
In a velocity-time graph , acceleration is represented by the slope of the graph line .
If the line slopes upward , like the line between A and B in Figure 12.13 , velocity is increasing , so acceleration is positive .
You can review the concept of acceleration as well as other chapter concepts by watching the musical video at this URL :
Force is defined as a push or a pull acting on an object .
Examples of forces include friction and gravity .
Both are covered in detail later in this chapter .
It occurs when a person or thing applies force to an object , like the girl pushing the swing in Figure 13.1 .
The force of the push causes the swing to move .
For example , the girl in Figure 13.1 is pushing the swing away from herself .
Like other vectors , forces can be represented with arrows .
Figure 13.2 shows some examples .
The length of each arrow represents the strength of the force , and the way the arrow points represents the direction of the force .
How could you use an arrow to represent the girls push on the swing in Figure 13.1 ?
One newton is the amount of force that causes a mass of 1 kilogram to accelerate at 1 m/s2 .
Thus , the newton can also be expressed as kgm/s2 .
Youll learn more about Sir Isaac Newton later in the chapter .
When two forces act on an object in opposite directions , like the book on the table , the net force is equal to the difference between the two forces .
In other words , one force is subtracted from the other to calculate the net force .
The net force on the rope is 2 newtons to the right , so the rope will move to the right .
The upward force minus the downward force equals zero -LRB- 20 N up - 20 N down = 0 N -RRB- .
Because the forces on the book are balanced , the book remains on the table and doesnt move .
In addition to these downward and upward forces , which generally cancel each other out , forces may push or pull an object in other directions .
Look at the dogs playing tug-of-war in Figure 13.4 .
One dog is pulling on the rope with a force of 10 newtons to the left .
The other dog is pulling on the rope with a force of 12 newtons to the right .
Two forces may act on an object in the same direction .
After the man on the left lifts up the couch , he will push the couch to the right with a force of 25 newtons .
At the same time , the man to the right is pulling the couch to the right with a force of 20 newtons .
When two forces act in the same direction , the net force is equal to the sum of the forces .
This always results in a stronger force than either of the individual forces alone .
In this case , the net force on the couch is 45 newtons to the right , so the couch will move to the right .
Problem : The boys in the drawing above are about to kick the soccer ball in opposite directions .
Friction is a force that opposes motion between two surfaces that are touching .
Friction can work for or against us .
For example , putting sand on an icy sidewalk increases friction so you are less likely to slip .
On the other hand , too much friction between moving parts in a car engine can cause the parts to wear out .
Other examples of friction are illustrated in Figure 13.7 .
You can see an animation showing how friction opposes motion at this URL : http : / / w
Friction occurs because no surface is perfectly smooth .
Even surfaces that look smooth to the unaided eye appear rough or bumpy when viewed under a microscope .
However , when highly magnified , the surface of metal appears to be very bumpy .
All those mountains and valleys catch and grab the mountains and valleys of any other surface that contacts the metal .
This creates friction .
The rougher surface of shoes causes more friction and slows you down .
You know that friction produces heat .
Thats why rubbing your hands together makes them warmer .
Oil coats the surfaces of moving parts and makes them slippery so there is less friction .
But do you know why the rubbing produces heat ?
Friction causes the molecules on rubbing surfaces to move faster , so they have more heat energy .
To reduce friction , oil is added to the engine .
Static friction acts on objects when they are resting on a surface .
Without this static friction , your feet would slip out from under you , making it difficult to walk .
Static friction also allows you to sit in a chair without sliding to the floor .
Sliding friction is friction that acts on objects when they are sliding over a surface .
Thats why its easier to slide a piece of furniture over the floor after you start it moving than it is to get it moving in the first place .
For example , you use sliding friction when you write with a pencil and when you put on your bikes brakes .
Rolling friction is friction that acts on objects when they are rolling over a surface .
This explains why it is much easier to move boxes on a wheeled dolly than by carrying or sliding them .
Fluid friction is friction that acts on objects that are moving through a fluid .
A fluid is a substance that can flow and take the shape of its container .
Fluids include liquids and gases .
If youve ever tried to push your open hand through the water in a tub or pool , then youve experienced fluid friction between your hand and the water .
When a skydiver is falling toward Earth with a parachute , fluid friction between the parachute and the air slows the descent -LRB- see Figure 13.14 -RRB- .
Fluid pressure with the air is called air resistance .
The faster or larger a moving object is , the greater is the fluid friction resisting its motion .
Gravity has traditionally been defined as a force of attraction between two masses .
According to this conception of gravity , anything that has mass , no matter how small , exerts gravity on other matter .
The effect of gravity is that objects exert a pull on other objects .
In fact , gravity can act over very long distances .
It prevents you and everything else on Earth from being flung out into space as the planet spins on its axis .
Gravity between Earth and the moon and between Earth and artificial satellites keeps all these objects circling around Earth .
Gravity also keeps Earth moving around the sun .
Weight measures the force of gravity pulling on an object .
On Earth , a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of about 10 newtons because of the pull of Earths gravity On the moon , which has less gravity , the same mass would weigh less .
Weight is measured with a scale , like the spring scale in Figure 13.16 .
The scale measures the force with which gravity pulls an object downward .
People have known about gravity for thousands of years .
They knew that things always fall toward the ground .
However , it wasnt until Sir Isaac Newton developed his law of gravity in the late 1600s that people really began to understand gravity .
Newton is pictured in Figure 13.17 .
Newton was the first one to suggest that gravity is universal and affects all objects in the universe .
Thats why his law of gravity is called the law of universal gravitation .
Universal gravitation means that the force that causes an apple to fall from a tree to the ground is the same force that causes the moon to keep moving around Earth .
Universal gravitation also means that while Earth exerts a pull on you , you exert a pull on Earth .
Even tiny molecules of gas are attracted to one another by the force of gravity .
Newtons law also states that the strength of gravity between any two objects depends on two factors : the masses of the objects and the distance between them .
For example , because Earth is so massive , it attracts you and your desk more strongly than you and your desk attract each other .
Thats why you and the desk remain in place on the floor rather than moving toward one another .
This is illustrated in Figure You can apply these relationships among mass , distance , and gravity by designing your own roller coaster at this URL : .
Newtons idea of gravity can predict the motion of most but not all objects .
Einstein showed mathematically that gravity is not really a force in the sense that Newton thought .
Imagine a bowling ball pressing down on a trampoline .
Einstein theorized that Earth and other very massive bodies affect space and time around them in a similar way .
This idea is represented in Figure 13.19 .
According to Einstein , objects curve toward one another because of the curves in space and time , not because they are pulling on each other with a force of attraction as Newton thought .
You already know that gravity causes objects to fall down to the ground .
Gravity affects the motion of objects in other ways as well .
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed .
This property is called elasticity .
As you stretch or compress an elastic material , it resists the change in shape .
This force is called elastic force .
Elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape as soon as the stretching or compressing force is released .
Because of these properties , springs are used in scales to measure weight .
They also cushion the ride in a car and provide springy support beneath a mattress .
A few common uses of elastic force are pictured in Figure 13.25 .
When you pull on the band , it stretches but doesnt break .
The resistance of the band to stretching is what gives your muscles a workout .
Springs like the ones in Figure 13.26 also have elastic force when they are stretched or compressed .
Newtons first law of motion states that an objects motion will not change unless an unbalanced force acts on the object .
If the object is at rest , it will stay at rest .
If the object is in motion , it will stay in motion and its velocity will remain the same .
In other words , neither the direction nor the speed of the object will change as long as the net force acting on it is zero .
You can watch a video about Newtons first law at this URL : http://videos.howstuffworks.com/ Look at the pool balls in Figure 14.2 .
When a pool player pushes the pool stick against the white ball , the white ball is set into motion .
Once the white ball is rolling , it rolls all the way across the table and stops moving only after it crashes into the cluster of colored balls .
Some may roll until they bounce off the raised sides of the table .
The inertia of an object depends on its mass .
To change the motion of an object , inertia must be overcome by an unbalanced force acting on the object .
Until the soccer player kicks the ball in Figure 14.4 , the ball remains motionless on the ground .
The ball starts moving across the field because its inertia has been overcome .
Newton determined that two factors affect the acceleration of an object : the net force acting on the object and the objects mass .
The relationships between these two factors and motion make up Newtons second law of motion .
This law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass .
This can be represented by the equation : Net force , or Mass F a = m Acceleration = You can watch a video about how Newtons second law of motion applies to football at this URL : http://science36
Newtons second law shows that there is a direct relationship between force and acceleration .
The greater the force that is applied to an object of a given mass , the more the object will accelerate .
The softball will accelerate less than the baseball because the softball has greater mass .
For example , doubling the mass of an object results in only half as much acceleration for the same amount of force .
What if the batter hits a baseball and a softball with the same amount of force ?
The equation for acceleration given above can be used to calculate the acceleration of an object that is acted on by an unbalanced force .
For example , assume you are pushing a large wooden trunk , like the one shown in Figure acceleration of the trunk , substitute these values in the equation for acceleration : a = F 20 N 2N = = m 10 kg kg Recall that one newton -LRB- 1 N -RRB- is the force needed to cause a 1-kilogram mass to accelerate at 1 m/s2 .
Therefore , force can also be expressed in the unit kgm/s2 .
This way of expressing force can be substituted for newtons in the solution to the problem : a = 2 N 2 kg m/s2 = = 2 m/s2 kg kg Why are there no kilograms in the final answer to this problem ?
As a result , the answer is expressed in the correct units for acceleration : m/s2 .
Newtons second law of motion explains the weight of objects .
Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling on an object of a given mass .
Then calculate his weight to see if your prediction is correct .
Helpful Hints The equation for calculating weight -LRB- F = m a -RRB- works only when the correct units of measurement are used .
Weight -LRB- F -RRB- is expressed in kgm/s2 or in newtons -LRB- N -RRB- .
Its the force -LRB- F -RRB- in the acceleration equation that was introduced above : a = F m This equation can also be written as : F = ma The acceleration due to gravity of an object equals 9.8 m/s2 , so if you know the mass of an object , you can calculate its weight as : F = m 9.8 m/s2 As this equation shows , weight is directly related to mass .
You can learn more about weight and acceleration at this URL : Problem Solving Problem : Daisy has a mass of 35 kilograms .
This means that forces always act in pairs .
As a result , the kangaroo jumps away from the ground .
First an action occurs , such as the skateboarders pushing together .
In the case of the skateboarders , they move apart , and the distance they move depends on how hard they first pushed together .
You can see other examples of actions and reactions in Figure 14.9 .
You can watch a video about actions and reactions at this URL : You might think that actions and reactions would cancel each other out like balanced forces do .
Balanced forces , which are also equal and opposite , cancel each other out because they act on the same object .
Action and reaction forces , in contrast , act on different objects , so they dont cancel each other out and , in fact , often result in motion .
For example , in Figure 14.9 , the kangaroos action acts on the ground , but the grounds reaction acts on the kangaroo .
Momentum can be calculated by multiplying an objects mass in kilograms -LRB- kg -RRB- by its velocity in meters per second -LRB- m/s -RRB- .
If the ball is traveling at a velocity of 50 m/s , its momentum is : Momentum = 0.05 kg 50 m/s = 2.5 kg m/s Note that the SI unit for momentum is kgm/s .
Problem Solving Problem : What is the momentum of a 40-kg child who is running straight ahead with a velocity of 2 m/s ?
When an action and reaction occur , momentum is transferred from one object to the other .
However , the com - bined momentum of the objects remains the same .
Consider the example of a truck colliding with a car , which is illustrated in Figure 14.11 .
Both vehicles are moving in the same direction before and after the collision , but the truck is moving faster than the car before the collision occurs .
During the collision , the truck transfers some of its momentum to the car .
After the collision , the truck is moving slower and the car is moving faster than before the collision occurred .
You can see an animation showing how momentum is conserved in a head-on collision at this URL : .
Paul Doherty of the Exploratorium performs a `` sit-down '' lecture on one of Sir Issac Newtons most famous laws .
For more information on Newtons laws of motion , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/quest-lab-newtons-laws - MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
At UC Berkeley , a team of undergrads is experimenting with velocity , force , and aerodynamics .
But you wont find them in a lab they work on a baseball diamond , throwing fast balls , sliders and curve balls .
QUEST discovers how the principles of physics can make the difference between a strike and a home run .
For more information on the physics of baseball , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/out-of-the-park-the-physics-of-baseball/ .
Buoyancy is the ability of a fluid to exert an upward force on any object placed in the fluid .
This upward force is called buoyant force .
Recall from the earlier lesson `` Pressure of Fluids '' that a fluid exerts pressure in all directions but the pressure is greater at greater depth .
Therefore , the fluid below an object exerts greater force on the object than the fluid above the object .
This is illustrated in Figure 15.12 .
Buoyant force explains why objects may float in water .
No doubt youve noticed , however , that some objects do not float in water .
If buoyant force applies to all objects in fluids , why do some objects sink instead of float ?
Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling down on an object .
Buoyant force pushes up on an object .
Some of the persons weight was countered by the buoyant force of the water .
Weight and buoyant force together determine whether an object sinks or floats .
This is illustrated in Figure 15.13 .
If an objects weight is greater than the buoyant force acting on the object , then the object sinks .
Because of buoyant force , objects seem lighter in water .
Density , or the amount of mass in a given volume , is also related to buoyancy .
Thats because density affects weight .
This explains why ice cubes float in a glass of water .
This and other examples of density and buoyant force are illustrated in Figure 15.14 and in the video at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Work is defined differently in physics than in everyday language .
In physics , work means the use of force to move an object .
However , as the stick person walks from left to right while holding the box at chest height , no more work is done by the persons arms holding the box up .
Thats because the force supporting the box acts in a different direction than the box is moving .
A small amount of work in the horizontal direction is performed when the person is accelerating during the first step of the walk across the room .
But other than that , there is no work , because there is no net force acting on the box horizontally .
The teen who is playing tennis in Figure 16.1 is using force to move her tennis racket , so she is doing work .
The teen who is studying isnt moving anything , so she is not doing work .
Not all force that is used to move an object does work .
For work to be done , the force must be applied in the same direction that the object moves .
If a force is applied in a different direction than the object moves , no work is done .
Figure 16.2 illustrates this point .
The stick person applies an upward force on the box when raising it from the ground to chest height .
Work is directly related to both the force applied to an object and the distance the object moves .
It can be represented by the equation : Work = Force Distance This equation shows that the greater the force that is used to move an object or the farther the object is moved , the more work that is done .
To see the effects of force and distance on work , compare the weight lifters in Figure 16.3 .
The two weight lifters on the left are lifting the same amount of weight , but the bottom weight lifter is lifting the weight a longer distance .
The two weight lifters on the bottom right are both lifting the weight the same distance , but the weight lifter on the left is lifting a heavier weight .
Did you ever rake leaves , like the woman in Figure 16.4 ?
But if you use an electric leaf blower , like the man in the figure , the job gets done much sooner .
Both the leaf blower and the rake do the work of removing leaves from the yard , but the leaf blower has more power .
Power can be represented by the equation : Power = Work Time In this equation , work is measured in joules and time is measured in seconds , so power is expressed in joules per second -LRB- J/s -RRB- .
Compared with a less powerful device , a more powerful device can either do more work in the same time or do the same work in less time .
For example , compared with a low-power microwave , a high-power microwave can cook more food in the same time or the same amount of food in less time .
This is the SI unit for work , also known as the watt -LRB- W -RRB- .
A watt equals 1 joule of work per second .
The watt is named for James Watt , a Scottish inventor you will read about below .
This amount of power could also be expressed kilowatts .
A kilowatt equals 1000 watts , so the 2000-watt hair dryer produces 2 kilowatts of power .
Power can be calculated using the formula above , if the amount of work and time are known .
First express 2000 watts in J/s and then substitute this value for power in the work equation : Work = 2000 J/s 30 s = 60 , 000 J For a video presentation on calculating power and work , go to this link : Problem Solving Problem : An electric mixer does 2500 joules of work in 5 seconds .
Solution : Use the equation : Power = Work Time .
Sometimes power is measured in a unit called the horsepower .
The horsepower was introduced by James Watt , who invented the first powerful steam engine in the 1770s .
Watts steam engine led to a revolution in industry and agriculture because of its power .
Watt wanted to impress people with the power of his steam engine , so he compared it with something familiar to people of his time : the power of workhorses , like those pictured in Figure 16.6 .
Watt said his steam engine could produce the power of 20 horses , or 20 horsepower .
The most powerful engines today may produce more than 100,000 horsepower !
A machine is any device that makes work easier by changing a force .
So if a machine increases the force applied , it must apply the force over a shorter distance .
Similarly , if a machine increases the distance over which the force is applied , it must apply less force .
This force is called the input force .
The machine , in turn , applies force to an object .
This force is called the output force .
Recall that work equals force multiplied by distance : Work = Force Distance The force you apply to a machine is applied over a given distance , called the input distance .
The force applied by the machine to the object is also applied over a distance , called the output distance .
Machines make work easier by increasing the amount of force that is applied , increasing the distance over which the force is applied , or changing the direction in which the force is applied .
Contrary to popular belief , machines do not increase the amount of work that is done .
Examples of machines that increase force are doorknobs and nutcrackers .
Figure 16.8 explains how these machines work .
In each case , the force applied by the user is less than the force applied by the machine , but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance .
Examples of machines that increase the distance over which force is applied are paddles and hammers .
Figure 16.9 explains how these machines work .
In each case , the machine increases the distance over which the force is applied , but it reduces the strength of the applied force .
Some machines change the direction of the force applied by the user .
Two examples of machines that work in this way are claw hammers and the rope systems -LRB- pulleys -RRB- that raise or lower flags on flagpoles .
Figure 16.10 explains how these machines work .
In each case , the direction of the force applied by the user is reversed by the machine .
How does this make it easier to do the job ?
An exoskeleton suit may seem like science fiction , turning ordinary humans into super heroes .
But wearable robots are moving forward into reality .
And for paraplegics , the ability to stand and walk that these machines provide is a super power .
QUEST meets Austin Whitney and Tamara Mena , two `` Exoskeleton Test Pilots '' who are now putting this new technology through its paces .
For more information on exoskeleton suits , see http://science.kqed.org/ques MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
You read above that machines do not increase the work done on an object .
Thats because all machines must use some of the work put into them to overcome friction .
Efficiency is the percent of input work that becomes output work .
It is a measure of how well a machine reduces friction .
Consider the ramp in Figure 16.11 .
Its easier to push the heavy piece of furniture up the ramp to the truck than to lift it straight up off the ground .
However , pushing the furniture over the surface of the ramp creates a lot of friction .
Some of the force applied to moving the furniture must be used to overcome the friction .
It would be more efficient to use a dolly on wheels to roll the furniture up the ramp .
Efficiency can be calculated with the equation : Efficiency = Output work 100 % Input work Consider a machine that puts out 6000 joules of work .
To produce that much work from the machine requires the user to put in 8000 joules of work .
To find the efficiency of the machine , substitute these values into the equation for efficiency : Efficiency = 6000 J 100 % = 75 % 8000 J You Try It !
Problem : Rani puts 10,000 joules of work into a car jack .
Mechanical advantage is the number of times a machine multiplies the input force .
It can be calculated with the equation : Mechanical Advantage = Output force Input force This equation computes the actual mechanical advantage of a machine .
It shows how much a machine actually multiplies force when it used in the real world .
It can be difficult to measure the input and output forces needed to calculate actual mechanical advantage .
Therefore , the ideal mechanical advantage of the ramp is : Ideal Mechanical Advantage = 6m = 3 2m An ideal mechanical advantage of 3 means that the ramp ideally -LRB- in the absence of friction -RRB- multiplies the output force by a factor of 3 .
These measurements can then be used to calculate the ideal mechanical advantage .
The ideal mechanical advantage represents the multiplication of input force that would be achieved in the absence of friction .
Therefore , it is greater than the actual mechanical advantage because all machines use up some work in overcoming friction .
Ideal mechanical advantage is calculated with the equation : Ideal Mechanical Advantage = Input distance Output distance Compare this equation with the equation above for actual mechanical advantage .
This makes sense when you recall that when a machine increases force , it decreases distance and vice versa .
You can watch a video about actual and ideal mechanical advantage at this link : http://video.goo Consider the simple ramp in Figure 16.12 .
A ramp can be used to raise an object up off the ground .
As you read above , some machines increase the force put into the machine , while other machines increase the distance over which the force is applied .
Still other machines change only the direction of the force .
Which way a machine works affects its mechanical advantage .
For machines that increase the distance over which force is applied , such as paddles and hammers , the output force is less than the input force .
For machines that change only the direction of the force , such as the rope systems on flagpoles , the output force is the same as the input force .
Both increase the force used to move an object because the input force is applied over a greater distance than the output force .
All three classes of levers make work easier , but they do so in different ways .
When the input and output forces are on opposite sides of the fulcrum , the lever changes the direction of the applied force .
This occurs only with first class-levers .
This occurs only with a first-class lever .
When both the input and output forces are on the same side of the fulcrum , the direction of the applied force does not change .
This occurs with both second - and third-class levers .
This always occurs with second-class levers and may occur with first-class levers .
When the input force is applied closer to the fulcrum , the input distance is less than the output distance , so the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1 .
This always occurs with third-class levers and may occur with first-class levers .
When both forces are the same distance from the fulcrum , the input distance equals the output distance , so the ideal mechanical advantage equals 1 .
This means that the output end of the lever must move faster than the input end .
A compound machine is a machine that consists of more than one simple machine .
For example , a wheelbarrow consists of a lever , as you read earlier in the lesson `` Simple Machines , '' and also a wheel and axle .
Other compound machines , such as cars , consist of hundreds or even thousands of simple machines .
To view a young students compound machine invention that includes several simple machines , watch the video at this link : .
To see if you can identify the simple machines in a lawn mower , go to the URL below and click on Find the Simple Machines .
As you can see from the figure , scissors consist of two levers and two wedges .
You apply force to the handle ends of the levers , and the output force is exerted by the blade ends of the levers .
Notice that the fulcrum lies between the input and output points , so the levers are first-class levers .
The fishing rod with reel shown in Figure 16.25 is another compound machine .
The output distance is greater than the input distance , so the angler can fling the fishing line far out into the water with just a flick of the wrist .
The reel is a wheel and axle that works as a pulley .
The fishing line is wrapped around the wheel .
Using the handle to turn the axle of the wheel winds or unwinds the line .
But the forces that allow humans to balance atop a bicycle are complex .
QUEST visits Davis a city that loves its bicycles to take a ride on a research bicycle and explore a collection of antique bicycles .
Scientists say studying the complicated physics of bicycling can lead to the design of safer , and more efficient bikes .
For more information on the science of riding a bicycle , see MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
As a result , compound machines tend to have lower efficiency than simple machines .
When a compound machine consists of a large number of simple machines , friction may become a serious problem , and it may produce a lot of heat .
Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts so they slide over each other more easily .
Thats because the mechanical advantage of a compound machine equals the product of the mechanical advantages of all its component simple machines .
The concept of energy was first introduced in the chapter `` States of Matter , '' where it is defined as the ability to cause change in matter .
Energy can also be defined as the ability to do work .
Work is done whenever a force is used to move matter .
When work is done , energy is transferred from one object to another .
For example , when the batter in Figure 17.2 uses energy to swing the bat , she transfers energy to the bat .
Like work , energy is measured in the joule -LRB- J -RRB- , or newtonmeter -LRB- Nm -RRB- .
Energy exists in different forms , which you can read about in the lesson `` Forms of Energy '' later in the chapter .
Most forms of energy can also be classified as kinetic or potential energy .
Potential energy due to the position of an object above Earth is called gravitational potential energy .
Like the leaves on trees , anything that is raised up above Earths surface has the potential to fall because of gravity .
It can be calculated with the equation : Gravitational potential energy -LRB- GPE -RRB- = weight height Consider the diver in Figure 17.5 .
Potential energy due to an objects shape is called elastic potential energy .
Their elasticity gives them the potential to return to their original shape .
For example , the rubber band in Figure 17.6 has been stretched , but it will spring back to its original shape when released .
Springs like the handspring in the figure have elastic potential energy when they are compressed .
The law of conservation of energy applies to energy conversions .
Energy is not used up when it changes form , although some energy may be used to overcome friction , and this energy is usually given off as heat .
For example , the divers kinetic energy at the bottom of his fall is the same as his potential energy when he was on the diving board , except for a small amount of heat resulting from friction with the air as he falls .
Figure 17.7 describes how potential energy changes to kinetic energy and back again on swings and trampolines .
QUEST teams up with Make Magazine to construct the latest must have , do-it-yourself device hacks and science projects .
This week well show you how to make a tabletop linear accelerator that demonstrates the finer points of kinetic energy by shooting a steel ball .
For more information on the tabletop linear accelerator , see http://science.k MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Energy , or the ability to do work , can exist in many different forms .
The photo in Figure 17.8 represents six of the eight different forms of energy that are described in this lesson .
The guitarist gets the energy he needs to perform from chemical energy in food .
The stage lights use electrical energy and give off both light energy and thermal energy , commonly called heat .
The guitar also uses electrical energy , and it produces sound energy when the guitarist plucks the strings .
The arrow in the same figure has mechanical energy because it has the potential to move due to the elasticity of the bow .
Energy is stored in the bonds between atoms that make up compounds .
This energy is called chemical energy , and it is a form of potential energy .
If the bonds between atoms are broken , the energy is released and can do work .
The energy is released as thermal energy when the wood burns .
People and many other living things meet their energy needs with chemical energy stored in food .
When food molecules are broken down , the energy is released and may be used to do work .
Electrons are negatively charged particles in atoms .
Moving electrons have a form of kinetic energy called electrical energy .
If youve ever experienced an electric outage , then you know how hard it is to get by without electrical energy .
Most of the electrical energy we use is produced by power plants and arrives in our homes through wires .
Two other sources of electrical energy are pictured in Figure 17.11 .
Energy that the sun and other stars release into space is called electromagnetic energy .
This form of energy travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves .
Electromagnetic energy is commonly called light .
The drummer in Figure 17.15 is hitting the drumheads with drumsticks .
This causes the drumheads to vibrate .
The vibrations pass to surrounding air particles and then from one air particle to another in a wave of energy called sound energy .
We hear sound when the sound waves reach our ears .
Sound energy can travel through air , water , and other substances , but not through empty space .
Thats because the energy needs particles of matter to pass it on .
Energy often changes from one form to another .
For example , the mechanical energy of a moving drumstick changes to sound energy when it strikes the drumhead and causes it to vibrate .
The more efficient a device is , the greater the percentage of usable energy it produces .
Appliances with an `` Energy Star '' label like the one in Figure 17.17 use energy efficiently and thereby reduce energy use .
Any form of energy can change into any other form .
Other examples of energy conversions are described in Figure 17.16 .
You can check your understanding of how energy changes form by doing the quizzes at these URLs : Energy is conserved in energy conversions .
No energy is lost when energy changes form , although some may be released as thermal energy due to friction .
For example , not all of the energy put into a steam turbine in Figure 17.16 changes to electrical energy .
Nonrenewable resources are natural resources that are limited in supply and can not be replaced except over millions of years .
Nonrenewable energy resources include fossil fuels and radioactive elements such as uranium .
Fossil fuels are mixtures of hydrocarbons that formed over millions of years from the remains of dead organisms .
They include petroleum -LRB- commonly called oil -RRB- , natural gas , and coal .
Fossil fuels contain stored chemical energy that came originally from the sun .
Ancient plants changed energy in
President Obama says the United States needs new nuclear reactors , to meet the countrys energy demands and counter climate change .
But can nuclear power be produced more safely and affordably ?
A scientist at the University of California , Berkeley , is working to do just that .
Renewable resources are natural resources that can be replaced in a relatively short period of time or are virtually limitless in supply .
Renewable energy resources include sunlight , moving water , wind , biomass , and geothermal energy .
Example Solar panels on the roof of this house generate enough electricity to supply a familys needs .
Moving Water When water falls downhill , its potential energy is con - verted to kinetic energy that can turn a turbine and generate electricity .
The water may fall naturally over a waterfall or flow through a dam .
A drawback of dams is that they flood land upstream and reduce water flow downstream .
Either effect may harm ecosystems .
Wind Wind is moving air , so it has kinetic energy that can do work .
Remember the wind turbines that opened this chapter ?
Wind turbines change the kinetic energy of the wind to electrical energy .
Only certain areas of the world get enough steady wind to produce much electricity .
Many people also think that wind turbines are noisy and unattractive in the landscape .
Each of these energy resources is described in Table 17.1 .
Water flowing through Hoover dam between Arizona and Nevada generates electricity for both of these states and also by southern California .
The dam spans the Colorado River .
This old-fashioned windmill captures wind energy that is used for pumping water out of a well .
Renewable Energy Resource Biomass The stored chemical energy of trees and other plants is called biomass energy .
When plant materials are burned , they produce thermal energy that can be used for heating , cooking , or generating electricity .
Biomassespecially woodis an important energy source in countries where most people cant afford fossil fuels .
Some plants can also be used to make ethanol , a fuel that is added to gasoline .
Ethanol produces less pollution than gasoline , but large areas of land are needed to grow the plants needed to make it .
Geothermal Heat below Earths surfacecalled geothermal en - ergycan be used to produce electricity .
A power plant pumps water underground where it is heated .
Then it pumps the water back to the plant and uses its thermal energy to generate electricity .
On a small scale , geothermal energy can be used to heat homes .
Example This large machine is harvesting and grinding plants to be used for biomass energy .
Besides their availability , renewable energy resources also have the advantage of producing little if any pollution and not contributing to global warming .
The technology needed to gather energy from renewable resources is currently expensive to install , but most of the resources themselves are free for the taking .
Renewable Energy Resource Sunlight The energy in sunlight , or solar energy , can be used to heat homes .
The largest solar thermal plant in the world opens in Californias Mojave Desert , after a debate that pitted renewable energy against a threatened tortoise .
The Ivanpah solar plant is one of seven big solar farms scheduled to open in California in the coming months , as a result of the states push to produce one third of its electricity from renewable energy .
For more information on this solar plant , see http://science.kqed.org/ MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
On the windswept tarmac of the former Alameda Naval Air Station , an inventive group of scientists and engineers are test-flying a kite-like tethered wing that may someday help revolutionize clean energy .
QUEST explores the potential of wind energy and new airborne wind turbines designed to harness the stronger and more consistent winds found at higher altitudes .
For more information on wind energy , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/airborne MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Solar and wind power may get the headlines when it comes to renewable energy .
But another type of clean power is heating up in the hills just north of Sonoma wine country .
Geothermal power uses heat from deep inside the Earth to generate electricity .
The Geysers , the worlds largest power-producing geothermal field , has been providing electricity for roughly 850,000 Northern California households , and is set to expand even further .
For more information on geothermal energy , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/geothermal-heats-up/ .
Figure 17.22 shows the mix of energy resources used worldwide in 2006 .
Fossil fuels still provide most of the worlds energy , with oil being the single most commonly used energy resource .
Natural gas is used less than the other two fossil fuels , but even natural gas is used more than all renewable energy resources combined .
Wind , solar , and geothermal energy contribute the least to global energy use , despite the fact that they are virtually limitless in supply and nonpolluting .
Figure 17.23 compares the amounts of oil used by the top ten oil-consuming nations .
In comparison , the average person in India or China uses just 1 or 2 barrels a year .
Because richer nations use more fossil fuels , they also cause more air pollution and global warming than poorer nations do .
We can reduce our use of energy resources and the pollution they cause by conserving energy .
Conservation means saving resources by using them more efficiently or not using them at all .
Figure 17.24 shows several ways that people can conserve energy in their daily lives .
For more information on home energy audits , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/web-extra-home-energy-audit/ .
With the race on to reduce global warming and fossil fuel dependency , experts in alternative energy see a bright future for renewable resources like wind , solar , hydro-power and geothermal energy .
QUEST and Climate Watch team up to look at the `` Smart Grid '' of the future and how it might be improved to more cleanly and efficiently keep the lights on in California .
Temperature affects thermal energy , but temperature isnt the same thing as thermal energy .
Thats because an objects mass also affects its thermal energy .
The examples in Figure 18.1 make this clear .
In the figure , the particles of cocoa are moving faster than the particles of bathwater .
Bill Nye the Science Guy cleverly discusses these concepts at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : If youre still not clear about the relationship between temperature and thermal energy , watch the animation `` Tem - perature '' at this URL : .
Temperature is measured with a thermometer .
A thermometer shows how hot or cold something is relative to two reference temperatures , usually the freezing and boiling points of water .
Solids generally expand the least .
Scientists often use the Celsius scale for temperature .
To learn more about measuring temperature , watch the animation Measuring Temperature at this URL : Did you ever wonder how a thermometer works ?
Look at the thermometer in Figure 18.2 .
Particles of the red liquid have greater energy when they are warmer , so they move more and spread apart .
This causes the liquid to expand and rise higher in the glass tube .
Like the liquid in a thermometer , most types of matter expand to some degree when they get warmer .
Gases usually expand the most when heated , followed by liquids .
Figure 18.3 illustrates an example of thermal energy transfer .
Before the spoon was put into the steaming hot coffee , it was cool to the touch .
Once in the coffee , the spoon heated up quickly .
The fast-moving particles of the coffee transferred some of their energy to the slower-moving particles of the spoon .
The spoon particles started moving faster and became warmer , causing the temperature of the spoon to rise .
Because the coffee particles lost some of their kinetic energy to the spoon particles , the coffee particles started to move more slowly .
This caused the temperature of the coffee to fall .
The roadway across the Golden Gate Bridge rises and falls as much as 16 feet depending on the temperature .
When the sun hits the bridge , the metal expands and the bridge cables stretch .
As the fog rolls in , the cables contract and the bridge goes up .
Curators from the Outdoor Exploratorium in San Francisco have set up a scope two miles away so you can see how the bridge is moving up or down depending on the weather .
For more information on how the bridge moves due to temperature , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/quest-lab-bridge-thermometer/ .
Thermal energy always moves from an object with a higher temperature to an object with a lower temperature .
Substances differ in their specific heat .
When energetic particles collide with nearby particles , they transfer some of their thermal energy .
In Figure 18.5 , conduction occurs between particles of the metal in the pot and between particles of the pot and the water .
For a deeper understanding of this method of heat transfer , watch the animation `` Conduction '' at this URL : http : / / w
Materials that are good conductors of thermal energy are called thermal conductors .
They have freely moving electrons that can transfer energy quickly and easily .
Thats why the metal pot in Figure 18.5 soon gets hot all over , even though it gains thermal energy from the fire only at the bottom of the pot .
In Figure 18.6 , the metal heating element of the curling iron heats up almost instantly and quickly transfers energy to the strands of hair that it touches .
Particles of gases are farther apart and have fewer collisions , so they are not good at transferring thermal energy .
Materials that are poor thermal conductors are called thermal insulators .
The air prevents the transfer of thermal energy into the house on hot days and out of the house on cold days .
A puffy down jacket keeps you warm in the winter for the same reason .
Its feather filling holds trapped air that prevents energy transfer from your warm body to the cold air outside .
Thats why pot handles and cooking utensils are often made of these materials .
Everyday , women living in the refugee camps of Darfur , Sudan must walk for up to seven hours outside the safety of the camps to collect firewood for cooking , putting them at risk for violent attacks .
Now , researchers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory have engineered a more efficient wood-burning stove , which is greatly reducing both the womens need for firewood and the threats against them .
For more information on these stoves , see http://scien MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Radiation is the only way of transferring energy that doesnt require matter .
Radiation is the transfer of energy by waves that can travel through empty space .
When the waves reach objects , they transfer energy to the objects , causing them to warm up .
This is how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface -LRB- see Figure 18.10 -RRB- .
You might be surprised to learn that all objects radiate thermal energy , including people .
In fact , when a room is full of people , it may feel noticeably warmer because of all the thermal energy the people radiate !
A hot-water heating system uses thermal energy to heat water and then pumps the hot water throughout the building in a system of pipes and radiators .
Typically , the water is heated in a boiler that burns natural gas or heating oil .
There is usually a radiator in each room that gets warm when the hot water flows through it .
The warm air then circulates throughout the room in convection currents .
The hot water cools as it flows through the system and transfers its thermal energy .
A warm-air heating system uses thermal energy to heat air .
Typically , the air is heated in a furnace that burns natural gas or heating oil .
Warm air blowing out of a vent moves across the room , pushing cold air out of the way .
The cold air enters an intake vent on the opposite side of the room and returns to the furnace with the help of another fan .
In the furnace , the cold air is heated , and the cycle repeats .
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the energy to do work .
The burning fuel releases thermal energy that is used to turn water to steam .
The pressure of the steam is then used to move a piston back and forth in a cylinder .
The kinetic energy of the moving piston can be used to turn a turbine or other device .
This type of engine is found in most cars and other motor vehicles .
The pressure of the hot gases from combustion forces the piston downward .
When the piston moves up again , it forces the exhaust gases of combustion out of the cylinder though another valve .
In a car , the piston is connected by the piston rod to the crankshaft .
The crankshaft rotates when the piston moves up and down .
The kinetic energy of the moving crankshaft is used to turn the driveshaft , which causes the wheels of the car to turn .
Most cars have at least four cylinders connected to the crankshaft .
Their pistons move up and down in sequence , one after the other .
It works in these steps , which keep repeating : 1 .
A mixture of fuel and air is pulled into a cylinder through a valve , which then closes .
The piston is pushed upward , compressing the fuel-air mixture in the closed cylinder .
A spark from a spark plug is used to ignite the fuel-air mixture , causing it to burn explosively within the confined space of the closed cylinder .
A mechanical wave is a disturbance in matter that transfers energy from place to place .
A mechanical wave starts when matter is disturbed .
An example of a mechanical wave is pictured in Figure 19.1 .
A drop of water falls into a pond .
This disturbs the water in the pond .
The disturbance travels outward from the drop in all directions .
A source of energy is needed to start a mechanical wave .
In this case , the energy comes from the falling drop of water .
The energy of a mechanical wave can travel only through matter .
Its important to note that particles of matter in the medium dont actually travel along with the wave .
The particles of the medium just vibrate , or move back-and - forth or up-and-down in one spot , always returning to their original positions .
All three types are described in detail below .
A transverse wave is a wave in which the medium vibrates at right angles to the direction that the wave travels .
An example of a transverse wave is a wave in a rope , like the one pictured in Figure 19.2 .
In this wave , energy is provided by a persons hand moving one end of the rope up and down .
The rope itself moves up and down as the wave passes through it .
To see a transverse wave in slow motion , go to this URL : -LRB- 0:22 -RRB- .
A transverse wave can be characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through .
This is illustrated in Figure 19.3 .
The high points are called crests , and the low points are called troughs .
Another example of transverse waves occurs with earthquakes .
The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends transverse waves through underground rocks in all directions from the disturbance .
Earthquake waves that travel this way are called secondary , or S , waves .
An S wave is illustrated in Figure 19.4 .
A longitudinal wave is a wave in which the medium vibrates in the same direction that the wave travels .
In this wave , the energy is provided by a persons hand pushing and pulling the spring .
The coils of the spring first crowd closer together and then spread farther apart as the disturbance passes through them .
A longitudinal wave can be characterized by the compressions and rarefactions of the medium .
This is illustrated in Figure 19.6 .
Earthquakes cause longitudinal waves as well as transverse waves .
The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends longitudinal waves through underground rocks in all directions from the disturbance .
Earthquake waves that travel this way are called primary , or P , waves .
They are illustrated in Figure 19.7 .
However , near the shore where the water is shallow , the waves behave differently .
The friction slows down the bottoms of the waves , while the tops of the waves keep moving at the same speed .
This causes the waves to get steeper until they topple over and crash on the shore .
The crashing waves carry water onto the shore as surf .
In a surface wave , particles of the medium move up and down as well as back and forth .
This gives them an overall circular motion .
URL : In deep water , particles of water just move in circles .
Both wave amplitude and wave - length are described in detail below .
You can also simulate waves with different amplitudes and wavelengths by doing the interactive animation at this URL : http://sci-culture.com/advancedpoll/GCSE/sine%20wave%20simulator.html .
Imagine making transverse waves in a rope , like the waves in Figure 19.2 .
You tie one end of the rope to a doorknob or other fixed point and move the other end up and down with your hand .
The speed of most waves depends on the medium through which they are traveling .
When particles are farther apart , it takes longer for the energy of the disturbance to pass from particle to particle .
The organizers of the famous Maverick surf contest have voted that the conditions are right for hanging ten this weekend .
The monster waves at Mavericks attract big wave surfers from around the world .
For more information on waves , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/scie MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Reflection occurs when waves bounce back from a barrier they can not pass through .
When waves strike an obstacle head on , the reflected waves bounce straight back in the direction they came from .
When waves strike an obstacle at any other angle , they bounce back at the same angle but in a different direction .
This is illustrated in Figure 19.16 .
Reflection can happen with any type of waves , not just sound waves .
For example , Figure 19.15 shows the reflection of ocean waves off a rocky coast .
Light from a light source , such as the sun or a light bulb , shines on the object and some of the light is reflected .
When the reflected light enters our eyes , we can see the object .
Did you ever notice that when youre walking down a street , you can hear sounds around the corners of buildings ?
Figure 19.18 shows why this happens .
As you can see from the figure , sound waves spread out and travel around obstacles .
This is called diffraction .
It also occurs when waves pass through an opening in an obstacle .
For example , sound waves bend around corners much more than light does .
For a given type of waves , such as sound waves , how much the waves diffract depends on two factors : the size of the obstacle or opening in the obstacle and the wavelength .
Constructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave .
This is illustrated in Figure 19.20 .
As the waves pass through each other , the crests combine to produce a wave with greater amplitude .
Destructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs of another wave .
This is illustrated in Figure 19.21 .
As the waves pass through each other , the crests and troughs cancel each other out to produce a wave with less amplitude .
When a wave is reflected straight back from an obstacle , the reflected wave interferes with the original wave and creates a standing wave .
This is a wave that appears to be standing still .
A standing wave occurs because of a combination of constructive and destructive interference between a wave and its reflected wave .
http://skullsinthestars.com/2008/05/04/classic-science-paper-otto-wieners-experiment-1890/ Its easy to generate a standing wave in a rope by tying one end to a fixed object and moving the other end up and down .
When waves reach the fixed object , they are reflected back .
The original wave and the reflected wave interfere to produce a standing wave .
Try it yourself and see if the wave appears to stand still .
All sounds begin with vibrating matter .
It could be the ground vibrating when a tree comes crashing down .
Or it could be guitar strings vibrating when they are plucked .
You can see a guitar string vibrating in Figure 20.2 .
The vibrating string repeatedly pushes against the air particles next to it .
The air particles alternately push together and spread apart .
This starts waves of vibrations that travel through the air in all directions away from the strings .
The vibrations pass through the air as longitudinal waves , with individual air particles vibrating back and forth in the same direction that the waves travel .
You can see an animation of sound waves moving through air at this URL :
Sound waves are mechanical waves , so they can travel only though matter and not through empty space .
This was demonstrated in the 1600s by a scientist named Robert Boyle .
Most of the sounds we hear travel through air , but sounds can also travel through liquids such as water and solids such as glass and metal .
If you swim underwater or even submerge your ears in bathwater any sounds you hear have traveled to your ears through water .
Boyle placed a ticking clock in a sealed glass jar .
Then Boyle pumped the air out of the jar .
URL : Sound waves can travel through many different kinds of matter .
Sound has certain characteristic properties because of the way sound energy travels in waves .
Properties of sound include speed , loudness , and pitch .
Later that day , your friend shouts to you across the football field .
The intensity of sound waves determines the loudness of sounds , but what determines intensity ?
Intensity is a function of two factors : the amplitude of the sound waves and how far they have traveled from the source of the sound .
Remember that sound waves start at a source of vibrations and spread out from the source in all directions .
The farther the sound waves travel away from the source , the more spread out their energy becomes .
This is illustrated in Figure 20.4 .
The decrease in intensity with distance from a sound source explains why even loud sounds fade away as you move farther from the source .
Now his voice is loud enough for you to hear him clearly even though hes many meters away .
For a video demonstration of the amplitude and loudness of sounds , go to this URL : interactive animation at this URL :
Obviously , sounds can vary in loudness .
Loudness refers to how loud or soft a sound seems to a listener .
As decibel levels get higher , sound waves have greater intensity and sounds are louder .
A marching band is parading down the street .
For a video demonstration of frequency and pitch , go to this URL : -LRB- 3:20 -RRB- .
URL : To explore an interactive animation of sound wave frequency , go to this URL : The frequency of sound waves is measured in hertz -LRB- Hz -RRB- , or the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a second .
Human beings can normally hear sounds with a frequency between about 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz .
Sounds with frequencies below 20 hertz are called infrasound .
Sounds with frequencies above 20,000 hertz are called ultrasound .
Some other animals can hear sounds in the ultrasound range .
For example , dogs can hear sounds with frequencies as high as 50,000 Hz .
You may have seen special whistles that dogs but not people can hear .
When the different instruments finally pass by you , their distinctive sounds can be heard .
The whistles produce a sound with a frequency too high for the human ear to detect .
Bats , for example , can hear sounds with frequencies higher than 100,000 Hz .
The tiny piccolos trill their bird-like high notes , and the big tubas rumble out their booming bass notes -LRB- see Figure 20.5 -RRB- .
How high or low a sound seems to a listener is its pitch .
Pitch , in turn , depends on the frequency of sound waves .
Recall that the frequency of waves is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time .
Figure 20.7 shows the three main parts of the ear : the outer , middle , and inner ear .
The roles of these structures in hearing are described below and in the animations at these URLS : -LRB- 1:43 -RRB- MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The outer ear includes the pinna , ear canal , and eardrum .
The pinna is the only part of the ear that extends outward from the head .
Its position and shape make it good at catching sound waves and funneling them into the ear canal .
The sound waves travel through the air inside the ear canal to the eardrum .
Its a thin membrane stretched tight across the end of the ear canal .
The eardrum vibrates when sound waves strike it , and it sends the vibrations on to the middle ear .
The middle ear contains three tiny bones -LRB- ossicles -RRB- called the hammer , anvil , and stirrup .
If you look at these bones in Figure 20.7 , you might notice that they resemble the objects for which they are named .
The three bones transmit vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear .
The arrangement of the three bones allows them to work together as a lever that increases the amplitude of the waves as they pass to the inner ear .
The stirrup passes the amplified sound waves to the inner ear through the oval window -LRB- see Figure 20.7 -RRB- .
When the oval window vibrates , it causes the cochlea to vibrate as well .
The cochlea is a shell-like structure that is full of fluid and lined with nerve cells called hair cells .
Each hair cell has tiny hair-like projections , as you can see in Figure and this triggers electrical impulses .
The electrical impulses travel to the brain through nerves .
Only after the nerve impulses reach the brain do we hear the sound .
Hearing loss caused by loud sounds is permanent .
However , this type of hearing loss can be prevented by protecting the ears from loud sounds .
People who work in jobs that expose them to loud sounds must wear hearing protectors .
Examples include construc - tion workers who work around loud machinery for many hours each day -LRB- see Figure 20.10 -RRB- .
But anyone exposed to loud sounds for longer than the permissible exposure time should wear hearing protectors .
Many home and yard chores and even recreational activities are loud enough to cause hearing loss if people are exposed to them for very long .
Earplugs are simple hearing protectors that just muffle sounds by partially blocking all sound waves from entering the ears .
They identify high-amplitude sound waves and send sound waves through them in the opposite direction .
This causes destructive interference with the waves , which reduces their amplitude to zero or nearly zero .
Sounds that people need to hear , such as the voices of co-workers , are not interfered with in this way and may be amplified instead so they can be heard more clearly .
This type of hearing protector is recommended for higher noise levels and situations where its important to be able to hear lower-decibel sounds .
People have been using sound to make music for thousands of years .
Despite their diversity , however , musical instruments share certain similarities .
All musical instruments create sound by causing matter to vibrate .
The vibrations start sound waves moving through the air .
Most musical instruments use resonance to amplify the sound waves and make the sounds louder .
Resonance occurs when an object vibrates in response to sound waves of a certain frequency .
In a musical instrument such as a guitar , the whole instrument and the air inside it may vibrate when a single string is plucked .
This causes constructive interference with the sound waves , which increases their amplitude .
Most musical instruments have a way of changing the frequency of the sound waves they produce .
Researchers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory are pioneering a new way to recover 100-year-old record - ings .
Found on fragile wax cylinders and early lacquer records , the sounds reveal a rich acoustic heritage , including languages long lost .
For more information on how to recover recordings , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/ MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Uses include echolocation , sonar , and ultrasonography .
Animals such as bats , whales , and dolphins send out ultrasound waves and use their echoes , or reflected waves , to identify the locations of objects they can not see .
This is called echolocation .
Animals use echolocation to find prey and avoid running into objects in the dark .
Figure 20.13 and the animation at the URL below show how a bat uses echolocation to locate insect prey .
Sonar uses ultrasound in a way that is similar to echolocation .
Sonar stands for sound navigation and ranging .
The sound wave travels to the bottom and back in 2 seconds , so it travels from the surface to the bottom in 1 second .
Problem : The sonar device on a ship sends an ultrasound wave to the bottom of the water at speed of 1437 m/s .
The wave is reflected back to the device in 4 seconds .
A sonar device is usually located on a boat at the surface of the water .
It sends out ultrasound waves and detects reflected waves that bounce off underwater objects or the bottom of the water .
If you watch the video at the URL below , you can see how sonar is used on a submarine .
The distance to underwater objects or the bottom of the water can be calculated from the known speed of sound in water and the time it takes for the waves to travel to the object .
The equation for the calculation is : Distance = Speed Time Assume , for example , that a sonar device on a ship sends an ultrasound wave to the bottom of the ocean .
The speed of the sound through ocean water is 1437 m/s , and the wave travels to the bottom and back in 2 seconds .
Ultrasound can be used to `` see '' inside the human body .
This use of ultrasound is called ultrasonography .
Harmless ultrasound waves are sent inside the body , and the reflected waves are used to create an image on a screen .
This technology is used to examine internal organs and unborn babies without risk to the patient .
In this QUEST web extra , Stanford University astrophysicist Todd Hoeksema explains how solar sound waves are a vital ingredient to the science of helioseismology , in which the interior properties of the sun are probed by analyzing and tracking the surface sound waves that bounce into and out of the Sun .
For more information on solar sound waves , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/web-extra-music-of-the-sun/ .
An electromagnetic wave is a wave that consists of vibrating electric and magnetic fields .
A familiar example will help you understand the fields that make up an electromagnetic wave .
Because of this force field , a magnet can exert force on objects without touching them .
An electric field is an area of electrical force surrounding a charged particle .
Like a magnetic field , an electric field can exert force on objects over a distance without actually touching them .
An electromagnetic wave begins when an electrically charged particle vibrates .
When a charged particle vibrates , it causes the electric field surrounding it to vibrate as well .
A vibrating electric field , in turn , creates a vibrating magnetic field -LRB- you can learn how this happens in the chapter `` Electromagnetism '' -RRB- .
The two types of vibrating fields combine to create an electromagnetic wave .
You can see an animation of an electromagnetic wave at this URL : -LRB- 1:31 -RRB- .
Unlike a mechanical transverse wave , which requires a medium , an electromagnetic transverse wave can travel through space without a medium .
Waves traveling through a medium lose some energy to the medium .
However , when an electromagnetic wave travels through space , no energy is lost , so the wave doesnt get weaker as it travels .
However , the energy is `` diluted '' as it spreads out over an ever-larger area as it travels away from the source .
This is similar to the way a sound wave spreads out and becomes less intense farther from the sound source .
Electromagnetic radiation behaves like waves of energy most of the time , but sometimes it behaves like particles .
As evidence accumulated for this dual nature of electromagnetic radiation , the famous physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation , called the wave-particle theory .
This theory explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle .
In brief , when an electron returns to a lower energy level , it is thought to give off a tiny `` packet '' of energy called a photon -LRB- see Figure 21.3 -RRB- .
Electromagnetic waves travel from the sun to Earth across space and provide virtually all the energy that supports life on our planet .
Many other sources of electromagnetic waves that people use depend on technology .
Youll learn about all these types of electromagnetic waves in this chapters lesson on `` The Electromagnetic Spectrum . ''
All electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through empty space .
The sun is about 150 million kilometers -LRB- 93 million miles -RRB- from Earth , but it takes electromagnetic radiation only 8 minutes to reach Earth from the sun .
Electromagnetic waves travel more slowly through a medium , and their speed may vary from one medium to another .
For example , light travels more slowly through water than it does through air -LRB- see Figure 21.4 -RRB- .
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed , they may differ in their wavelength and frequency .
Wavelength and frequency are defined in the same way for electromagnetic waves as they are for mechanical waves .
Both properties are illustrated in Figure 21.5 .
Wavelengths of electromagnetic waves range from many kilometers to a tiny fraction of a millimeter .
Frequency is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time .
Frequencies of electro - magnetic waves range from thousands to trillions of waves per second .
Because all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed through space , a wave with a shorter wavelength must have a higher frequency , and vice versa .
This relationship is represented by the equation : Speed = Wavelength Frequency The equation for wave speed can be rewritten as : Frequency = Speed Speed or Wavelength = Wavelength Frequency Therefore , if either wavelength or frequency is known , the missing value can be calculated .
Its frequency can be found by substituting these values into the frequency equation : Frequency = 3.0 108 m/s = 1.0 108 waves/s , or 1.0 108 hertz -LRB- Hz -RRB- 3.0 m You Try It !
For more practice calculating the frequency and wavelength of electromagnetic waves , go to these URLs :
Electromagnetic radiation occurs in waves of different wavelengths and frequencies .
Infrared light and visible light make up just a small part of the full range of electromagnetic radiation , which is called the electromagnetic spectrum .
Waves in this middle section of the electromagnetic spectrum are commonly called light .
As you will read below , the properties of electromagnetic waves influence how the different waves behave and how they can be used .
The electromagnetic spectrum is summarized in the diagram in Figure 21.7 .
On the far left of the diagram are radio waves , which include microwaves .
In radio broadcasts , sounds are encoded in radio waves that are sent out through the atmosphere from a radio tower .
A receiver detects the radio waves and changes them back to sounds .
FM stands for frequency modulation .
In FM broadcasts , sound signals are encoded by changing the frequency of radio waves .
Frequency modulation allows FM waves to encode more information than does amplitude modulation , so FM broadcasts usually sound clearer than AM broadcasts .
However , because of their shorter wavelength , FM waves do not reflect off the ionosphere .
Youve probably listened to both AM and FM radio stations .
How sounds are encoded in radio waves differs between AM and FM broadcasts .
In AM broadcasts , sound signals are encoded by changing the amplitude of radio waves .
AM broadcasts use longerwavelength radio waves than FM broadcasts .
Because of their longer wavelengths , AM radio waves reflect off a layer of the upper atmosphere called the ionosphere .
You can see how this happens in Figure 21.8 .
This allows AM radio waves to reach radio receivers that are very far away from the radio tower .
Television broadcasts also use radio waves .
Sounds are encoded with frequency modulation , and pictures are encoded with amplitude modulation .
The encoded radio waves are broadcast from a TV tower like the one in Figure 21.9 .
When the waves are received by television sets , they are decoded and changed back to sounds and pictures .
The only light that people can see is called visible light .
It refers to a very narrow range of wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum that falls between infrared light and ultraviolet light .
When all of the wavelengths are combined , as they are in sunlight , visible light appears white .
Light with the longest wavelengths is called infrared light .
The sun gives off infrared light as do fires and living things .
The picture of a cat that opened this chapter was made with a camera that detects infrared light waves and changes their energy to colored light in the visible range .
Night vision goggles , which are used by law enforcement and the military , also detect infrared light waves .
The goggles convert the invisible waves to visible images .
For a deeper understanding of infrared light , watch the video at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Light with wavelengths shorter than visible light is called ultraviolet light .
The term ultraviolet means `` above violet . ''
You can protect your skin from ultraviolet light by wearing clothing that covers your skin and by applying sunscreen to any exposed areas .
The SPF , or sun - protection factor , of sunscreen gives a rough idea of how long it protects the skin from sunburn -LRB- see Figure 21.13 -RRB- .
A sunscreen with a higher SPF protects the skin longer .
You should use sunscreen with an SPF of at least 15 even on cloudy days , because ultraviolet light can travel through clouds .
Sunscreen should be applied liberally and often .
You can learn more about the effects of ultraviolet light on the skin at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Humans cant see ultraviolet light , but it is very useful nonetheless .
It can be used to kill bacteria in food and to sterilize laboratory equipment -LRB- see Figure 21.12 -RRB- .
The human skin also makes vitamin D when it is exposed to ultraviolet light .
Vitamin D is needed for strong bones and teeth .
You can learn more about ultraviolet light and its discovery at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : Too much exposure to ultraviolet light can cause sunburn and skin cancer .
These rays have so much energy that they can pass through many materials .
This makes them potentially very harmful , but it also makes them useful for certain purposes .
Too much X ray exposure may cause cancer .
If youve had dental X rays , you may have noticed that a heavy apron was placed over your body to protect it from stray X rays .
The apron is made of lead , which X rays can not pass through .
Scientists in Berkeley have developed a powerful new microscope which uses X rays to scan a whole cell and in a manner of minutes , generate a 3D view of the cell and its genetic material .
This groundbreaking tool is helping to advance research into the development of biofuels , the treatment of malaria and it may even help to more rapidly diagnose cancer .
For more information on X ray microscopes , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/x-ray-micros MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The sun and other stars produce light because they are so hot .
Another type of luminescence is called electroluminescence .
In this process , a substance gives off light when an electric current runs through it .
Some gases produce light in this way .
A third type of luminescence is called bioluminescence .
Examples of bioluminescent organisms are pictured in Figure 22.2 .
You can learn more about bioluminescence in the video at this URL : Many other objects appear to produce their own light , but they actually just reflect light from another source .
Objects like the moon that are lit up by another source of light are said to be illuminated .
This way of producing light is called incandescence .
Some objects produce light without becoming very hot .
Objects that produce light by luminescence are said to be luminous .
Luminescence , in turn , can occur in different ways : One type of luminescence is called fluorescence .
In this process , a substance absorbs shorter-wavelength light , such as ultraviolet light , and then gives off light in the visible range of wavelengths .
Certain minerals produce light in this way .
The bulb contains a thin wire filament made of tungsten .
When electric current passes through the filament , it gets extremely hot and glows .
Fluorescent Light A fluorescent light bulb produces visible light by flu - orescence .
The bulb contains mercury gas that gives off ultraviolet light when electricity passes through it .
The inside of the bulb is coated with a substance called phosphor .
The phosphor absorbs the ultraviolet light and then gives off most of the energy as visible light .
You can learn more about fluorescent light bulbs at this URL : http://science.discovery.com/videos/deco Type of Light Bulb Neon Light Vapor Light LED Light Description A neon light produces visible light by electrolumines - cence .
The bulb is a glass tube that contains the noble gas neon .
When electricity passes through the gas , it excites electrons of neon atoms , causing them to give off visible light .
There are also projectors on the ceiling that are shining light on screens .
Neon produces red light .
Other noble gases are also used in lights , and they produce light of different colors .
For example , krypton produces violet light , and argon produces blue light .
A vapor light produces visible light by electrolumi - nescence .
The bulb contains a small amount of solid sodium or mercury as well as a mixture of neon and argon gases .
When an electric current passes through the gases , it causes the solid sodium or mercury to change to a gas and emit visible light .
Sodium vapor lights , like these streetlights , produce yellowish light .
Mercury vapor lights produce bluish light .
In these and most other artificial light sources , electricity provides the energy and some type of light bulb converts the electrical energy to visible light .
This type of light contains a material , called a semi-conductor , which gives off visible light when a current runs through it .
LED lights are used for traffic lights and indicator lights on computers , cars , and many other devices .
How a light bulb produces visible light varies by type of bulb , as you can see in Table 22.1 .
Incandescent light bulbs , which produce light by incandescence , give off a lot of heat as well as light , so they waste energy .
Other light bulbs produce light by luminescence , so they produce little if any heat .
These light bulbs use energy more efficiently .
Type of Light Bulb Incandescent Light Description An incandescent light bulb produces visible light by incandescence .
When visible light strikes matter , it interacts with it .
How light interacts with matter depends on the type of matter .
Light may interact with matter in several ways .
This is called transmission of light .
This is called scattering of light .
Light may be absorbed by matter .
This is called absorption of light .
When light is absorbed , it doesnt reflect from or pass through matter .
Instead , its energy is transferred to particles of matter , which may increase the temperature of matter .
Reflected light bounces back when it strikes matter .
Light may be refracted by matter .
The light is bent when it passes from one type of matter to another .
Light may pass through matter .
Matter can be classified on the basis of how light interacts with it .
Matter may be opaque because it absorbs light , reflects light , or does both .
A wooden door absorbs most of the light that strikes it and reflects just a few wavelengths of visible light .
A mirror , which is a sheet of glass with a shiny metal coating on the back , reflects all the light that strikes it .
Each type of matter is illustrated in Figure 22.3 .
Transparent matter is matter that transmits light without scattering it .
Examples of transparent matter include air , pure water , and clear glass .
Translucent matter is matter that transmits but scatters light .
Light passes through a translucent object but you can not see clearly through the object because the light is scattered in all directions .
Opaque matter is matter that does not let any light pass through it .
Visible light consists of a range of wavelengths .
The wavelength of visible light determines the color that the light appears .
As you can see in Figure 22.4 , light with the longest wavelength appears red , and light with the shortest wavelength appears violet .
Only a few colors of light are represented in the figure .
A prism , like the one in Figure 22.5 , can be used to separate visible light into its different colors .
A prism is a pyramid-shaped object made of transparent matter , usually clear glass .
For an animated version of Figure 22.5 , go to the URL : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Light_dispersion_conce
When light passes from the air to the glass of the prism , the change in speed causes the light to bend .
This causes the beam of light to separate into light of different wavelengths .
Look back at the rainbow that opened this chapter .
Individual raindrops act as tiny prisms .
The wavelengths that are reflected determine the color that the object appears .
For example , the apple in the figure appears red because it reflects red light and absorbs light of other wavelengths .
We see a transparent or translucent object , such as the bottle in Figure 22.6 , because it transmits light .
The wavelength of the transmitted light determines the color that the object appears .
For example , the bottle in the figure appears blue because it transmits blue light .
The color of light that strikes an object may also affect the color that the object appears .
For example , if only blue light strikes a red apple , the blue light is absorbed and no light is reflected .
When no light reflects from an object , it looks black .
The human eye can distinguish only red , green , and blue light .
These three colors of light are called primary colors .
All other colors of light can be created by combining the primary colors .
When red and blue light combine , they form magenta , a dark pinkish color , and when blue and green light combine , they form cyan , a bluish green color .
Yellow , magenta , and cyan are called the secondary colors of light .
When all three primary colors combine , they form white light .
You can explore the colors of visible light and how they combine with the interactive animations at this URL : .
Many objects have color because they contain pigments .
A pigment is a substance that colors materials by reflecting light of certain wavelengths and absorbing light of other wavelengths .
A very common pigment is chlorophyll , which is found in plants .
This dark green pigment absorbs all but green wavelengths of visible light .
It is responsible for capturing the light energy needed for photosynthesis .
Pigments are also found in paints , inks , and dyes .
Just three pigments , called primary pigments , can be combined to produce all other colors .
The printer ink cartridges in Figure 22.8 come in just these three colors .
Artist Kate Nichols longed to paint with the iridescent colors of butterfly wings , but no such pigments existed .
So she became the first artist-in-residence at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory to synthesize nanoparticles and incorporate them into her artwork .
From the laboratory to the studio , see how Kate uses the phenomenon known as `` structural color '' to transform nanotechnology into creativity .
For more information on using nanoparticles to create colors , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/science-on-the-spot-color-by-nano-the-art-of-kate-nichols/ .
Almost all surfaces reflect some of the light that strikes them .
The still water of the lake in Figure 22.9 reflects almost all of the light that strikes it .
If a surface is extremely smooth , like very still water , then an image formed by reflection is sharp and clear .
If the surface is even slightly rough , an image may not form , or if there is an image , it is blurry or fuzzy .
Both types of reflection are represented in Figure 22.10 .
You can also see animations of both types of reflection at this URL : http://toolboxes.flexiblelearning.net.au/demosites/serie In Figure 22.10 , the waves of light are represented by arrows called rays .
Rays that strike the surface are referred to as incident rays , and rays that reflect off the surface are known as reflected rays .
In regular reflection , all the rays are reflected in the same direction .
This explains why regular reflection forms a clear image .
In diffuse reflection , in contrast , the rays are reflected in many different directions .
The image formed by a plane mirror is also life sized .
But something is different about the image compared with the real object in front of the mirror .
Look at the man shaving in Figure 22.12 .
He is using his right hand to hold the razor , but his image appears to be holding the razor in the left hand .
A concave mirror is shaped like the inside of a bowl .
This type of mirror forms either real or virtual images , depending on where the object is placed relative to the focal point .
You can see how concave mirrors form images in Figure 22.13 and in the interactive animation at the URL below .
The animation allows you to move an object to see how its position affects the image .
Concave mirrors are used behind car headlights .
The other type of curved mirror , a convex mirror , is shaped like the outside of a bowl .
The image is always right-side up and smaller than the actual object , which makes the object appear farther away than it really is .
You can see how a convex mirror forms an image in Figure 22.14 and in the animation at the URL below .
Because of their shape , convex mirrors can gather and reflect light from a wide area .
This is why they are used as side mirrors on cars .
Therefore , when light passes from air to glass , it slows down .
However , if light enters the glass at an angle other than 90 , the wave refracts , or bends .
This is illustrated in Figure change in speed , the more light bends .
Lenses make use of the refraction of light to create images .
A lens is a transparent object , typically made of glass , with one or two curved surfaces .
Figure 22.16 shows how a concave lens forms an image .
Concave lenses are used in cameras .
They focus reduced images inside the camera , where they are captured and stored .
They cause rays of light to converge , or meet , at a point called the focus -LRB- F -RRB- .
Convex lenses form either real or virtual images .
A light microscope is an instrument that uses lenses to make enlarged images of objects that are too small for the unaided eye to see .
The magnifications of all the lenses are multiplied together to yield the overall magnification of the microscope .
Some light microscopes can magnify objects more than 1000 times !
For more on light microscopes and the images they create , watch the video at this URL : -LRB- 7:29 -RRB- .
Like microscopes , telescopes use convex lenses to make enlarged images .
However , telescopes make enlarged images of objectssuch as distant starsthat only appear tiny because they are very far away .
The two types are compared in Figure 22.19 .
A camera is an optical instrument that records an image of an object .
The image may be recorded on film or it may be detected by an electronic sensor that stores the image digitally .
Regardless of how the image is recorded , all cameras form images in the same basic way , as demonstrated in Figure 22.20 and at the URL below .
Light passes through the lens at the front of the camera and enters the camera through an opening called the aperture .
As light passes through the lens , it forms a reduced real image .
The image focuses on film -LRB- or a sensor -RRB- at the back of the camera .
The lens may be moved back and forth to bring the image into focus .
The shutter controls the amount of light that strikes the film -LRB- or sensor -RRB- .
For a series of animations showing how a camera works , go to this URL : .
A laser is a device that produces a very focused beam of light of just one wavelength and color .
You can see an animation showing how a laser works at this URL : -LRB- 1:12 -RRB- .
URL : Besides entertaining a cat , laser light has many other uses .
It is used to scan bar codes , for example , and to carry communication signals in optical fibers .
Optical fibers are extremely thin glass tubes that are used to guide laser light -LRB- see Figure 22.23 -RRB- .
Sounds or pictures are encoded in pulses of laser light , which are then sent through an optical fiber .
All of the light reflects off the inside of the fiber , so none of it escapes .
As a result , the signal remains strong even over long distances .
More than one signal can travel through an optic fiber at the same time , as you can see in Figure 22.23 .
Optical fibers are used to carry telephone , cable TV , and Internet signals .
Laser light is created in a tube like the one shown in Figure 22.22 .
Electrons in a material such as a ruby crystal are stimulated to radiate photons of light of one wavelength .
This focuses the light .
A constant stream of photons passes through the transparent part , forming the laser beam .
The structure of the human eye is shown in Figure 22.24 .
Find each structure in the diagram as you read about it below .
The lens is a convex lens that fine-tunes the focus so an image forms on the back of the eye .
Tiny muscles control the shape of the lens to focus images of close or distant objects .
The retina is a membrane lining the back of the eye .
The retina has nerve cells called rods and cones that change images to electrical signals .
Rods are good at sensing dim light but cant distinguish different colors of light .
Cones can sense colors but not in dim light .
The optic nerve carries electrical signals from the rods and cones to the brain .
It protects the eye and also acts as a convex lens , helping to focus light that enters the eye .
It allows light to enter the eye .
The pupil automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed .
The iris is the colored part of the eye .
As just described , the eyes collect and focus visible light .
The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus a real image on the retina .
The image is upside-down and reduced in size , as you can see in Figure 22.25 .
The image reaches the brain as electrical signals that travel through the optic nerve .
The brain interprets the signals as shape , color , and brightness .
The brain does this automatically , so what we see is always right-side up .
The brain also tells us what we are seeing .
The problems often can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses .
Myopia can be corrected with concave lenses .
Farsightedness , or hyperopia , is the condition in which distant objects are seen clearly , but nearby objects are blurry .
It occurs when the eyeball is shorter than normal .
This causes images to be focused in back of the retina .
Hyperopia can be corrected with convex lenses .
The lenses focus images farther forward in the eye , so they are on the retina instead of behind it .
Some vision problems can also be corrected with laser surgery , which reshapes the cornea .
URL : Nearsightedness , or myopia , is the condition in which nearby objects are seen clearly , but distant objects are blurry .
This causes images to be focused in front of the retina .
A magnet is an object that attracts certain materials such as iron .
Like all magnets , this bar magnet has north and south poles and attracts objects such as paper clips that contain iron .
The poles are called north and south because they always line up with Earths north-south axis if the magnet is allowed to move freely .
-LRB- Earths axis is the imaginary line around which the planet rotates . -RRB-
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials is called magnetic force .
Like electric force , magnetic force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion .
North and south poles of two magnets attract each other , while two north poles or two south poles repel each other .
Like the electric field that surrounds a charged particle , a magnetic field surrounds a magnet .
This is the area around the magnet where it exerts magnetic force .
The animations at the URL below show how magnetic field lines change as two or more magnets move in relation to each other .
Figure 24.3 shows the magnetic field surrounding a bar magnet .
Tiny bits of iron , called iron filings , were placed under a sheet of glass .
When the magnet was placed on the glass , it attracted the iron filings .
The pattern of the iron filings shows the lines of force that make up the magnetic field of the magnet .
The concentration of iron filings near the poles indicates that these areas exert the strongest force .
To see an animated magnetic field of a bar magnet , go to this URL : http://elgg.norfolk.e2bn.org/jsmith112/files/68/149/ When two magnets are brought close together , their magnetic fields interact .
The drawings show how lines of force of north and south poles attract each other whereas those of two north poles repel each other .
Magnetism is the ability of a material to be attracted by a magnet and to act as a magnet .
No doubt youve handled refrigerator magnets like the ones in Figure 24.5 .
Wood and glass arent attracted to a magnet , whereas the steel refrigerator is .
Obviously , only certain materials respond to magnetic force .
When electrons spin around the nucleus of an atom , it causes the atom to become a tiny magnet , with north and south poles and a magnetic field .
However , the material can be magnetized by placing it in a magnetic field .
When this happens , all the magnetic domains become aligned , and the material becomes a magnet .
This is illustrated in Figure 24.6 .
Materials that can be magnetized are called ferromagnetic materials .
In most materials , the electrons orbiting the nuclei of the atoms are arranged in such a way that the materials have no magnetic properties .
Examples of nonmagnetic materials include wood , glass , plastic , paper , copper , and aluminum .
These materials are not attracted to magnets and can not become magnets .
In other materials , electrons fill the orbitals of the atoms that make up the material in a way to allow for each atom to have a tiny magnetic field , giving each atom a tiny north and south pole .
There are large areas where the north and south poles of atoms are all lined up in the same direction .
These areas are called magnetic domains .
Materials that have been magnetized may become temporary or permanent magnets .
An example of each type of magnet is described below .
These actions move the magnetic domains out of alignment .
If you bring a bar magnet close to pile of paper clips , the paper clips will become temporarily magnetized , as all their magnetic domains align .
As a result , the paper clips will stick to the magnet and also to each other .
However , if you remove the paper clips from the bar magnets magnetic field , their magnetic domains will no longer align .
As a result , the paper clips will no longer be magnetized or stick together .
Its magnetic domains will remain aligned even after you remove it from the magnetic field of the bar magnet .
Permanent magnets can be demagnetized , however , if they are dropped or heated to high temperatures .
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis , as illustrated in Figure 24.10 .
Although a compass always points north , it doesnt point to Earths geographic north pole , which is located at 90 north latitude -LRB- see Figure 24.11 -RRB- .
Why does this happen if opposite poles attract ?
Its called the magnetic north pole to avoid confusion .
Earths magnetic field is called the magnetosphere .
For an animated version of the magnetosphere , watch the video at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Once the magma hardens , the alignment of magnetic domains in the rock is frozen in place forever .
The newly hardened rock is then gradually pushed away from the ridge in both directions as more magma erupts and newer rock forms .
Rock samples from many places on the ocean floor reveal that magnetic domains of rocks from different time periods are aligned in opposite directions .
The evidence shows that Earths magnetic field reversed hundreds of times over the last 330 million years .
What might happen if a magnetic reversal occurred in your lifetime ?
For example , an author might write about a time in the distant past when compasses pointed south instead of north .
This is illustrated in Figure 24.13 .
Scientists dont know for certain why magnetic reversals occur , but there is hard evidence showing that they have occurred .
The evidence comes from rocks on the ocean floor .
Look at Figure 24.14 , which shows a ridge on the ocean floor .
At the center of the ridge , hot magma pushes up through the crust and hardens into rock .
It was first proposed in 1600 by a British physician named William Gilbert .
However , explaining why Earth acts like a magnet is a relatively recent discovery .
It had to wait until the development of technologies such as seismographs , which detect and measure earthquake waves .
Then scientists could learn about Earths inner structure -LRB- see Figure 24.15 -RRB- .
They discovered that Earth has an inner and outer core and that the outer core consists of liquid metals , mainly iron and nickel .
Scientists think that Earths magnetic field is generated by the movement of charged particles through the molten metals in the outer core .
The particles move as Earth spins on its axis .
The video at the URL below takes a closer look at how this occurs .
Earths magnetic field helps protect Earth and its organisms from harmful particles given off by the sun .
People use compasses to detect Earths magnetic north pole and tell direction .
Many animals have natural `` compasses '' that work just as well .
Birds like the garden warbler in Figure 24.16 use Earths magnetic field to guide their annual migrations .
Recent research suggests that warblers and other migrating birds have structures in their eyes that let them see Earths magnetic field as a visual pattern .
You can learn more about animals and Earths magnetic field , including the potential effects of magnetic field reversals , at this URL : .
Northern California residents may not be able to see the northern lights like people in Alaska can , but Bay Area scientists are playing a key role in understanding them .
Find out more about the spectacular light shows up north and what scientists at UC Berkeley are discovering about the Earths magnetic field .
As a result , elements can be identified by their properties .
However , iron is attracted by a magnet , whereas nickel is not .
The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle thought that all matter consists of just four elements .
He thought that different kinds of matter contain only these four elements but in different combinations .
Aristotles ideas about elements were accepted for the next 2000 years .
Then , scientists started discovering the many unique substances we call elements today .
Scientists soon realized that there are far more than just four elements .
Eventually , they discovered a total of 92 naturally occurring elements .
For example , atoms of gold are the same whether they are found in a gold nugget or a gold ring -LRB- see Figure 3.8 -RRB- .
Sodium is a silvery solid that reacts explosively with water , and chlorine is a poisonous gas -LRB- see Figure 3.9 -RRB- .
But together , sodium and chlorine form a harmless , unreactive compound that you can safely sprinkle on food .
A molecule consists of two or more atoms that are joined together .
For example , a molecule of water consists of two hydrogen atoms joined to one oxygen atom -LRB- see Figure 3.10 -RRB- .
A crystal is a rigid , lattice-like framework of many atoms bonded together .
Table salt is an example of a compound that forms crystals -LRB- see Figure 3.11 -RRB- .
Its crystals are made up of many sodium and chloride ions .
You can actually watch crystals forming in this video : .
This means they vary in their composition .
Three types of mixtures based on particle size are described below .
The particles of solutions are also too small to settle or be filtered out of the mixture .
The particles of a suspension are big enough to reflect light , so you can see them .
Anything that you have to shake before using , such as salad dressing , is usually a suspension .
Examples include homogenized milk and gelatin .
The particles of a colloid are large enough to reflect light , so you can see them .
Thats why salt water looks the same as pure water .
The components of a mixture keep their own identity when they combine .
Their different physical properties are used to separate them .
For example , oil is less dense than water , so a mixture of oil and water can be separated by letting it stand until the oil floats to the top .
Other ways of separating mixtures are shown in Figure 3.14 and in the videos below .
-LRB- 2:30 -RRB- MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
URL : -LRB- 2:41 -RRB- MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Figure 5.1 represents a simple model of an atom .
The nucleus contains most of the atoms mass .
The nucleus , in turn , consists of two types of particles , called protons and neutrons .
These particles are tightly packed inside the nucleus .
Constantly moving about the nucleus are other particles called electrons .
This mass number means that an atom of helium has a mass of about 4 amu .
How many protons and neutrons does the atom have ?
The nucleus is very small , but it is densely packed with matter .
One atomic mass unit equals the mass of a proton , which is about 1.7 10 24 g. Each neutron also has a mass of 1 amu .
Two numbers are commonly used to distinguish atoms : atomic number and mass number .
Figure 5.4 shows how these numbers are usually written .
Atoms of the same element that differ in number of neutrons are called isotopes .
Many isotopes occur naturally .
For a video explanation of isotopes , go to this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Three isotopes of hydrogen are modeled in Figure 5.6 .
Most hydrogen atoms have just one proton and one electron and lack a neutron .
These atoms are the isotope named deuterium .
These atoms are the isotope named tritium .
For most other elements , isotopes are named for their mass number .
For example , carbon atoms with the usual 6 neutrons have a mass number of 12 -LRB- 6 protons + 6 neutrons = 12 -RRB- , so they are called carbon-12 .
These atoms are the isotope called carbon-13 .
It is used by scientists to estimate the ages of rocks and fossils .
Remember the quarks from the first page of this chapter ?
The charges of quarks are balanced exactly right to give a positive charge to a proton and a neutral charge to a neutron .
It might seem strange that quarks are never found alone but only as components of other particles .
This is because the quarks are held together by very strange particles called gluons .
Gluons make quarks attract each other more strongly the farther apart the quarks get .
To understand how gluons work , imagine holding a rubber band between your fingers .
If you try to move your hands apart , they will be pulled back together by the rubber band .
The farther apart you move your hands , the stronger the force of the rubber band pulling your hands together .
Gluons work the same way on quarks inside protons and neutrons -LRB- and other , really rare particles too -RRB- .
However , all the energy that is put into a particle to make this possible is then used to create a new set of quarks and gluons .
The existence of quarks was first proposed in the 1960s .
Since then , scientists have done experiments to show that quarks really do exist .
QUEST journeys back to find out how physicists on the UC Berkeley campus in the 1930s , and at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center in the 1970s , created `` atom smashers '' that led to key discoveries about the tiny constituents of the atom and paved the way for the Large Hadron Collider in Switzerland .
The history of the atom begins around 450 B.C.
with a Greek philosopher named Democritus -LRB- see Figure 5.7 -RRB- .
Democritus wondered what would happen if you cut a piece of matter , such as an apple , into smaller and smaller pieces .
He thought that a point would be reached where matter could not be cut into still smaller pieces .
This is where the modern term atom comes from .
However , he was less influential than the Greek philosopher Aristotle , who lived about 100 years after Democritus .
Aristotle rejected Democrituss idea of atoms .
Around 1800 , a British chemist named John Dalton revived Democrituss early ideas about the atom .
Dalton is pictured in Figure 5.8 .
Dalton did many experiments that provided evidence for atoms .
He concluded that gases must consist of tiny particles in constant motion .
Dalton also researched the properties of compounds .
He showed that a compound always consists of the same elements in the same ratio .
This can happen , Dalton reasoned , only if elements are made of tiny particles that can combine in an endless variety of ways .
From his research , Dalton developed a theory of the atom .
Dalton incorrectly thought that atoms are tiny solid particles of matter .
The sketch in the Figure 5.9 shows how Daltons model atoms looked .
When later scientists discovered subatomic particles -LRB- particles smaller than the atom itself -RRB- , they realized that Daltons models were too simple .
They didnt show that atoms consist of even smaller particles .
Models including these smaller particles were later developed .
They were discovered in 1897 by a British physicist named J. J. Thomson .
You can learn more about Thomson and his discovery at this online exhibit : .
The experiments are described in Figure 5.10 .
Thomsons experiments showed that an electric current consists of flowing , negatively charged particles .
Many scientists of Thomsons time thought that electric current consists of rays , like rays of light , and that it is positive rather than negative .
Thomsons experiments also showed that the negative particles are all alike and smaller than atoms .
Thomson concluded that the negative particles couldnt be fundamental units of matter because they are all alike .
The negative particles were later named electrons .
Thomson knew that atoms are neutral in electric charge .
So how could atoms contain negative particles ?
Thomson thought that the rest of the atom must be positive to cancel out the negative charge .
He said that an atom is like a plum pudding , which has plums scattered through it .
Thats why Thomsons model of the atom is called the plum pudding model .
It shows the atom as a sphere of positive charge -LRB- the pudding -RRB- with negative electrons -LRB- the plums -RRB- scattered through it .
A physicist from New Zealand named Ernest Rutherford made the next major discovery about atoms .
In 1899 , Rutherford discovered that some elements give off positively charged particles .
Most of the alpha particles passed straight through the foil as though they were moving through empty space .
Even more surprising , a few of the alpha particles bounced back from the foil as though they had struck a wall .
This is called back scattering .
In 1911 , he used alpha particles to study atoms .
Outside the foil , he placed a screen of material that glowed when alpha particles struck it .
If Thomsons plum pudding model were correct , the alpha particles should be deflected a little as they passed through the foil .
The positive `` pudding '' part of gold atoms would slightly repel the positive alpha particles .
But Rutherford got a surprise .
Based on his results , Rutherford concluded that all the positive charge of an atom is concentrated in a small central area .
Rutherford later discovered that the nucleus contains positively charged particles .
Rutherford also predicted the existence of neutrons in the nucleus .
One of his students , a physicist named James Chadwick , went on to discover neutrons in 1932 .
Bohrs research focused on electrons .
Remember , Rutherford thought that electrons orbit the nucleus at random .
Electrons can jump from one energy level to another .
If an atom absorbs energy , some of its electrons can jump to a higher energy level .
If electrons jump to a lower energy level , the atom emits , or gives off , energy .
You can see an animation at this happening at the URL below .
They are the only places where electrons can be found .
The same goes for electrons .
For example , when chemicals in fireworks explode , their atoms absorb energy .
Some of their electrons jump to a higher energy level .
When the electrons move back to their original energy level , they give off the energy as light .
Different chemicals have different arrangements of electrons , so they give off light of different colors .
This explains the blue - and purple - colored fireworks in Figure 5.16 .
In the 1920s , physicists discovered that electrons do not travel in fixed paths .
It is the `` wave nature '' of electrons that lets them exist only at certain distances from the nucleus .
The negative electrons are attracted to the positive nucleus .
However , because the electrons behave like waves , they bend around the nucleus instead of falling toward it .
Electrons exist only where the wave is stable .
Today , these ideas about electrons are represented by the electron cloud model .
Figure 5.17 shows an electron cloud model for a helium atom .
of Electrons -LRB- @ 2 per orbital -RRB- 2 8 18 32 Figure 5.18 shows the arrangement of electrons in an atom of magnesium as an example .
The most stable arrange - ment of electrons occurs when electrons fill the orbitals at the lowest energy levels first before more are added at higher levels .
Therefore , these levels can hold more electrons .
He was writing a chemistry textbook and needed a way to organize the elements so it would be easier for students to learn about them .
You can see how Mendeleev organized the elements in Figure 6.2 .
From left to right across each row , elements are arranged by increasing atomic mass .
In Mendeleevs table , each period contains eight elements , and then the pattern repeats in the next row .
Mendeleev discovered that if he placed eight elements in each row and then continued on to the next row , the columns of the table would contain elements with similar properties .
Mendeleevs table of the elements is called a periodic table because of its repeating pattern .
Anything that keeps repeating is referred to as periodic .
Other examples of things that are periodic include the monthly phases of the moon and the daily cycle of night and day .
The term period refers to the interval between repetitions .
They are spaces that Mendeleev left for elements that had not yet been discovered when he created his table .
An important measure of a good model is its ability to make accurate predictions .
This makes it a useful model .
It helped scientists discover new elements and make sense of those that were already known .
He predicted that these missing elements would eventually be discovered .
Scientists searched for the missing element .
Scientists searched for the other missing elements .
A periodic table is still used today to classify the elements .
Figure 6.3 shows the modern periodic table .
In the modern periodic table , elements are organized by atomic number .
-LRB- Mendeleev used atomic mass instead of atomic number because protons had not yet been discovered when he made his table . -RRB-
Besides atomic number , the periodic table includes each elements chemical symbol and class .
Some tables include other information as well .
Blue stands for metals , orange for metalloids , and green for nonmetals .
The chemical symbol consists of one or two letters that come from the chemicals name in English or another language .
The first letter is always written in upper case .
The second letter , if there is one , is always written in lower case .
It comes from the Latin word plumbum , which means `` lead . ''
Find lead in Figure 6.3 .
Rows of the modern table are called periods , as they are in Mendeleevs table .
Many of these elements have only recently been shown to exist .
Elements 114 and 116 were added to the table in 2011 .
Four more elements -LRB- 113 , 115 , 117 , and 118 -RRB- were approved for addition in December 2015 and will be named at some later date .
In each period , elements change from metals on the left side of the table , to metalloids , and then to nonmetals on the right .
Figure 6.4 shows this for period 4 .
For example , period 1 contains only two elements .
Periods 6 and 7 , in contrast , are so long that some of their elements are placed below the main part of the table .
They are the elements starting with lanthanum -LRB- La -RRB- in period 6 and actinium -LRB- Ac -RRB- in period 7 .
Some elements in period 7 have not yet been named .
Columns of the modern table are called groups , as they are in Mendeleevs table .
Because atoms are always electrically neutral , for each added proton , one electron is also added .
Electrons are added first to the lowest energy level possible until that level is full .
Only then are electrons added to the next higher energy level .
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table .
Look at period 2 in Figure 6.8 as an example .
This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons .
This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons .
The electrons in the outer energy level of an atom are called valence electrons .
It is valence electrons that are potentially involved in chemical reactions .
These elements need to gain or lose too many electrons for a full outer energy level to come about easily .
The number of valence electrons determines an elements reactivity , or how likely the element is to react with other elements .
Lithium reacts explosively with water -LRB- see picture -RRB- .
Boron compounds dissolved in water form boric acid .
Dilute boric acid is weak enough to use as eye wash . Bromine Bromine -LRB- Br -RRB- is an extremely reactive nonmetal .
Neon -LRB- Ne -RRB- is a nonmetal gas with a completely filled outer energy level .
The number of valence electrons also determines whether the element can conduct electric current .
This makes it unreactive , so it doesnt combine with other elements .
Neon is used for lighted signs like this one .
You can learn why neon gives off light at this link : Neon
Table 6.1 shows how these properties vary in elements from each class .
Group 1 is shown in Figure element in the universe .
You can see a video demonstrating the reactivity of alkali metals with water at this URL : -LRB- 2:22 -RRB- .
Because alkali metals are so reactive , they are only found in nature combined with other elements .
Most are soft enough to cut with a knife .
Some of them even float on water .
The alkaline Earth metals include all the elements in group 2 -LRB- see Figure 6.10 -RRB- .
Groups 3-12 of the periodic table contain transition metals -LRB- see Figure 6.11 -RRB- .
Many of the actinides do not occur in nature but are made in laboratories .
They tend to be very hard , with high melting and boiling points .
Transition metals include the elements that are placed below the periodic table .
Those that follow lanthanum -LRB- La -RRB- are called lanthanides .
Those that follow Actinium -LRB- Ac -RRB- are called actinides .
Groups 13-16 each contain one or more metalloids .
These groups are shown in Figure 6.12 .
Group 15 is called the nitrogen group .
These are followed by two metalloids and one metal .
All the elements in the nitrogen group have five valence electrons , but they vary in their reactivity .
Group 13 is called the boron group .
Group 16 is called the oxygen group .
Elements in group 17 are called halogens -LRB- see Figure 6.13 -RRB- .
The halogens react violently with alkali metals , which have one valence electron .
The two elements combine to form a salt .
The halogen group includes gases , liquids , and solids .
You can watch a video demonstrating the reactivity of halogens at this URL : .
Group 18 elements are nonmetals called noble gases -LRB- see Figure 6.14 -RRB- .
Elements form compounds when they combine chemically .
Their atoms join together to form molecules , crystals , or other structures .
In a water molecule , two hydrogen atoms share their two electrons with the six valence electrons of one oxygen atom .
By sharing electrons , each atom has electrons available to fill its sole or outer energy level .
This gives it a more stable arrangement of electrons that takes less energy to maintain .
The atoms are held together by chemical bonds .
It occurs when atoms share or transfer valence electrons .
URL : Look at the example of water in Figure 7.1 .
A water molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen .
Water molecules always consist of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen .
Like water , all other chemical compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements .
Elements are represented by chemical symbols .
Problem : A molecule of nitrogen dioxide consists of one atom of nitrogen -LRB- N -RRB- and two atoms of oxygen -LRB- O -RRB- .
Compounds are represented by chemical formulas .
The subscript 2 after the H shows that there are two atoms of hydrogen in a molecule of water .
When there is just one atom of an element in a molecule , no subscript is used .
Table 7.1 shows some other examples of compounds and their chemical formulas .
Name of Compound Electron Dot Diagram Numbers of Atoms Chemical Formula Name of Compound Hydrogen chloride Electron Dot Diagram Numbers of Atoms H = 1 Cl = 1 Chemical Formula HCl Methane C = 1 H = 4 CH4 Hydrogen peroxide H = 2 O = 2 H2 O2 Carbon dioxide C = 1 O = 2 CO2 Problem Solving Problem : A molecule of ammonia consists of one atom of nitrogen -LRB- N -RRB- and three atoms of hydrogen -LRB- H -RRB- .
The same elements may combine in different ratios .
Figure 7.2 shows some examples .
If youve ever used hydrogen peroxide to disinfect a cut , then you know that it is very different from water !
Both carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- and carbon monoxide -LRB- CO -RRB- consist of carbon and oxygen , but in different ratios .
They differ in the nature of the bonds that hold their atoms together .
The type of bonds in a compound determines many of its properties .
Chocolate : Its been revered for millennia by cultures throughout the world .
But while its easy to appreciate all of its delicious forms , creating this confection is a complex culinary feat .
Local chocolate makers explain the elaborate engineering and chemistry behind this tasty treat .
An ionic bond is the force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions .
It forms when atoms of a metallic element give up electrons to atoms of a nonmetallic element .
Negative ions are named by adding the suffix ide to the first part of the element name .
Brackets separate the ions in the diagram to show that the ions in the compound do not share electrons .
Figure 7.3 shows how this happens .
In row 1 of Figure 7.3 , an atom of sodium donates an electron to an atom of chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- .
By losing an electron , the sodium atom becomes a sodium ion .
Positive ions such as sodium are given the same name as the element .
The chemical symbol has a plus sign to distinguish the ion from an atom of the element .
By gaining an electron , the chlorine atom becomes a chloride ion .
Ionic bonds form only between metals and nonmetals .
Metals `` want '' to give up electrons , and nonmetals `` want '' to gain electrons .
After sodium gives up its valence electron to fluorine , both atoms have a more stable arrangement of electrons .
Find sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- in Figure 7.4 .
If sodium loses that one electron , it will have a full outer energy level .
Now find fluorine -LRB- F -RRB- in Figure 7.4 .
It takes energy to remove valence electrons from an atom .
The force of attraction between the negative electrons and positive nucleus must be overcome .
Halogens release the most energy when they form ions .
The amount of energy needed depends on the element .
Less energy is needed to remove just one or a few electrons than many .
This explains why sodium and other alkali metals form positive ions so easily .
Less energy is also needed to remove electrons from larger atoms in the same group .
What happens when an atom gains an electron and becomes a negative ion ?
Most ionic compounds dissolve easily in water .
The ions can move freely , so they are good conductors of electricity .
Dissolved ionic compounds are called electrolytes .
As a result , ionic crystals tend to shatter .
You can learn more about the properties of ionic compounds by watching the video at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
The strong bonds between ions lock them into place in the crystal .
Some are shown in Figure 7.6 .
Many ionic compounds are used in industry .
The human body also needs several ions for good health .
Having low levels of the ions can endanger important functions such as heartbeat .
Solutions of ionic compounds can be used to restore the ions .
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of electrons .
The shared electrons are attracted to the nuclei of both atoms .
Several other elements also normally occur as diatomic molecules : nitrogen , oxygen , and all but one of the halogens -LRB- fluorine , chlorine , bromine , and iodine -RRB- .
Covalent bonds form only between atoms of nonmetals .
If the bonds form between atoms of different elements , a covalent compound forms .
Covalent compounds are described in detail later in the lesson .
To see a video about covalent bonding , go to this URL : -LRB- 6:20 -RRB- .
URL : Figure 7.7 shows an example of a covalent bond forming between two atoms of the same element , in this case two atoms of hydrogen .
The two atoms share a pair of electrons .
Covalent bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons .
Look at the hydrogen atoms in Figure 7.7 .
This can happen in many different ways .
One way is shown in Figure 7.8 .
This forms the covalent compound water .
The shared electrons are attracted to both hydrogen nuclei .
This force of attraction holds the two atoms together as a molecule of hydrogen .
Some atoms need to share more than one pair of electrons to have a full outer energy level .
It needs two more electrons to fill its outer energy level .
In some covalent bonds , electrons are not shared equally between the two atoms .
These are called polar bonds .
These bonds are called nonpolar bonds .
Neither atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly .
As a result , the atoms remain neutral .
Figure 7.10 shows an example of nonpolar bonds .
The oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly because its nucleus has more positively charged protons .
As a result , the oxygen atom becomes slightly negative in charge .
For another example of polar bonds , see the video at this URL : -LRB- 0:52 -RRB- .
URL : In other covalent bonds , electrons are shared equally .
Covalent bonds between atoms of different elements form covalent compounds .
These are written with subscripts in the chemical formula .
Example : The gas that consists of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms is named carbon dioxide .
Problem : What is the name of the compound that contains three oxygen atoms and two nitrogen atoms ?
Examples include proteins and carbohydrates .
Helpful Hints Naming Covalent Compounds Follow these rules in naming simple covalent compounds : The element closer to the left of the periodic table is named first .
The second element gets the suffix ide .
Prefixes such as di - -LRB- 2 -RRB- and tri - -LRB- 3 -RRB- show the number of each atom in the compound .
Covalent compounds exist as individual molecules rather than crystals .
It takes less energy for individual molecules than ions in a crystal to pull apart .
Covalent compounds have shared electrons .
This makes covalent compounds poor conductors of electricity .
Many covalent compounds also do not dissolve in water as all ionic compounds do .
Having polar bonds may make a covalent compound polar .
This type of bond is called a hydrogen bond .
To learn more about hydrogen bonding and when it occurs , see the video at this URL : -LRB- 0:58 -RRB- .
But having polar bonds does not necessarily result in a polar compound .
This is illustrated in Figure 7.11 .
Both molecules in the figure contain polar bonds , but only formaldehyde is a polar compound .
The molecules of polar compounds are attracted to each other .
The positive ions form a lattice-like structure .
-LRB- For an animated version , go to the URL below . -RRB-
The ions are held together in the lattice by bonds with the valence electrons around them .
These valence electrons include their own and those of other ions .
Recall that metals `` want '' to give up their valence electrons .
This means that their valence electrons move freely .
The electrons form a `` sea '' of negative charge surrounding the positive ions .
Because of their freely moving electrons , metals are good conductors of electricity .
Metals also can be shaped without breaking .
In this way , the metal can change shape without breaking .
A metallic lattice , like the one in Figure 7.13 , may resemble a rigid ionic crystal .
It shows a blacksmith hammering a piece of red-hot iron in order to shape it .
The ions of the metal can move within the `` sea '' of electrons without breaking the metallic bonds that hold them together .
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances change into different substances .
Substances that start a chemical reaction are called reactants .
Substances that are produced in the reaction are called products .
A chemical reaction can be represented by this general equation : Reactants !
The reaction may occur quickly or slowly .
For example , foam shoots out of a fire extinguisher as soon as the lever is pressed .
In chemical reactions , bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products .
The reactants and prod - ucts contain the same atoms , but they are rearranged during the reaction .
Look at the example in Figure 8.2 .
Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen .
Then new bonds form in molecules of water .
But the atoms are combined differently in water .
You can see another example at this URL : http : / / w
The arrow in Figure 8.2 shows that the reaction goes from left to right , from hydrogen and oxygen to water .
The reaction can also go in the reverse direction .
If an electric current passes through water , water molecules break down into molecules of hydrogen and oxygen .
This reaction would be represented by a right-to-left arrow -LRB- -RRB- in Figure Many other reactions can also go in both forward and reverse directions .
Often , a point is reached at which the forward and reverse reactions occur at the same rate .
This point is called equilibrium , which refers to a balance between any opposing changes .
You can see an animation of a chemical reaction reaching equilibrium at this URL :
Not all changes in matter involve chemical reactions .
For example , there are no chemical reactions involved in changes of state .
The solid is called a precipitate .
You can see examples of each type of evidence in Figure 8.3 and at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
How can you tell whether a change in matter involves a chemical reaction ?
Change in temperature : heat is released or absorbed during the reaction .
Production of a gas : gas bubbles are released during the reaction .
Production of a solid : a solid settles out of a liquid solution .
It is a shorthand way of showing how atoms are rearranged in the reaction .
If more than one product were produced , plus signs would be used between them as well .
The general form of a chemical equation was introduced in this chapters lesson `` Introduction to Chemical Reactions . ''
Coefficients are used to balance chemical equations .
A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula .
Count the oxygen atoms to find out .
It shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction .
For example , two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2H2 .
Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 -LRB- above -RRB- as follows : Equation 2 : 2H2 + O2 !
2H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water .
The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms .
Balancing a chemical equation involves a certain amount of trial and error .
Helpful Hint When you balance chemical equations , never change the subscripts in chemical formulas .
Changing subscripts changes the substances involved in the reaction .
URL : Problem Solving Problem : Balance this chemical equation : N2 + H2 !
Count the number of each type of atom in reactants and products .
Two N are needed in the products to match the two N -LRB- N2 -RRB- in the reactants .
Add the coefficient 2 in front of NH3 .
Six H are now needed in the reactants to match the six H in the products .
Add the coefficient 3 in front of H2 .
Does the same number of each atom appear on both sides of the arrow ?
Add coefficients to increase the number of atoms or molecules of reactants or products .
As a result , any gases involved in the reactions were captured and could be measured .
This showed that matter was neither created nor destroyed in the reactions .
Matter can not be created or destroyed in chemical reactions .
In every chemical reaction , the same mass of matter must end up in the products as started in the reactants .
Balanced chemical equations show that mass is conserved in chemical reactions .
How do scientists know that mass is always conserved in chemical reactions ?
Careful experiments in the 1700s by a French chemist named Antoine Lavoisier led to this conclusion .
For this and other contributions , Lavoisier has been called the father of modern chemistry .
Lavoisier carefully measured the mass of reactants and products in many different chemical reactions .
An example of a synthesis reaction is the combination of sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- and chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- to produce sodium chloride -LRB- NaCl -RRB- .
This reaction is represented by the chemical equation : 2Na + Cl2 !
Another example of a synthesis reaction is illustrated in Figure 8.7 .
It forms when nitric oxide -LRB- NO -RRB- , from sources such as car exhaust , combines with oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- in the air .
An example of a decomposition reaction is the breakdown of carbonic acid -LRB- H2 CO3 -RRB- to produce water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- and carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- .
H2 O + CO2 Carbonic acid is synthesized in the reverse reaction .
It forms when carbon dioxide dissolves in water .
For example , some of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere dissolves in the ocean and forms carbonic acid .
The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has increased over recent decades -LRB- see Figure 8.8 -RRB- .
Another example of a decomposition reaction is illustrated in Figure 8.9 .
Water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- decomposes to hydrogen -LRB- H2 -RRB- and oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- when an electric current passes through it .
This reaction is represented by the equation : 2H2 O !
A single replacement reaction occurs when one ion takes the place of another in a single compound .
B + AC Do you see how A has replaced B in the compound ?
The compound BC has become the compound AC .
An example of a single replacement reaction occurs when potassium -LRB- K -RRB- reacts with water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- .
A colorless solid called potassium hydroxide -LRB- KOH -RRB- forms , and hydrogen gas -LRB- H2 -RRB- is released .
A double replacement reaction occurs when two compounds exchange ions .
This produces two new compounds .
A double replacement reaction can be represented by the general equation : AB + CD !
An example of a double replacement reaction is sodium chloride -LRB- NaCl -RRB- reacting with silver fluoride -LRB- AgF -RRB- .
This reaction is represented by the equation : NaCl + AgF !
NaF + AgCl Cl and F have changed places .
The fuel that burns in a combustion reaction is often a substance called a hydrocarbon .
A hydrocarbon is a compound that contains only carbon -LRB- C -RRB- and hydrogen -LRB- H -RRB- .
Fossil fuels , such as natural gas , consist of hydrocarbons .
Natural gas is a fuel that is commonly used in home furnaces and gas stoves -LRB- see Figure 8.11 -RRB- .
The main component of natural gas is the hydrocarbon called methane -LRB- CH4 -RRB- .
The combustion of methane is represented by the equation : CH4 + 2O2 !
Your own body cells burn fuel in combustion reactions .
The process in which combustion of glucose occurs in body cells is called cellular respiration .
This combustion reaction provides energy for life processes .
Cellular respiration can be summed up by the equation : C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 !
In this process , carbon dioxide and water combine to form glucose .
Whether a reaction absorbs energy or releases energy , there is no overall change in the amount of energy .
The excess energy in the reactants is released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs .
The graphs in Figure 8.14 show the chemical energy of reactants and products in each type of reaction .
Energy can change form for example , from electricity to light but the same amount of energy always remains .
If energy can not be destroyed , what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction ?
The energy is stored in the chemical bonds of the products .
This form of energy is called chemical energy .
In an endothermic reaction , the products have more stored chemical energy than the reactants .
Any factor that helps reactants come together so they can react lowers the amount of activation energy needed to start the reaction .
If the activation energy is lowered , more reactant particles can react , and the reaction occurs more quickly .
How fast a reaction occurs is called the reaction rate .
Factors that affect the reaction rate include : temperature of reactants concentration of reactants surface area of reactants presence of catalysts
At higher temperatures , particles of reactants have more energy , so they move faster .
For example , when you fry an egg , turning up the heat causes the egg to cook faster .
The same principle explains why storing food in a cold refrigerator reduces the rate at which food spoils -LRB- see Figure 8.16 -RRB- .
Both food frying and food spoiling are chemical reactions that happen faster at higher temperatures .
At higher concentrations , particles of reactants are crowded closer together , so they are more likely to collide and react .
You might see it where someone is using a tank of pure oxygen for a breathing problem .
The greater concentration of oxygen in the air makes combustion rapid if a fire starts burning .
When a solid substance is involved in a chemical reaction , only the matter at the surface of the solid is exposed to other reactants .
If a solid has more surface area , more of it is exposed and able to react .
Therefore , increasing the surface area of solid reactants increases the reaction rate .
For example , crushing a solid into a powder exposes more of the substance to other reactants .
This may greatly speed up the reaction .
You can see another example in Figure 8.18 .
Iron rusts when it combines with oxygen in the air .
Some reactions need extra help to occur quickly .
A reaction that takes a split second to occur with an enzyme might take billions of years without it !
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction but is not changed or used up in the reaction .
The catalyst can go on to catalyze many more reactions .
Catalysts are not reactants , but they help reactants come together so they can react .
You can see one way this happens in the animation at the URL below .
By helping reactants come together , a catalyst decreases the activation energy needed to start a chemical reaction .
Living things depend on catalysts to speed up many chemical reactions inside their cells .
Catalysts in living things are called enzymes .
Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that are involved in chemical bonds .
The valence electrons of carbon are shown in Figure 9.1 .
Carbon can form single , double , or even triple bonds with other carbon atoms .
In a single bond , two carbon atoms share one pair of electrons .
In a double bond , they share two pairs of electrons , and in a triple bond they share three pairs of electrons .
Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are shown in Figure 9.3 .
A polymer is a large molecule that consists of many smaller molecules joined together by covalent bonds .
This means that they are produced in labs or factories .
Synthetic polymers are created in synthesis reactions in which monomers bond together to form much larger compounds .
The plastic items in Figure 9.5 are all made of polythene -LRB- also called polyethylene -RRB- .
To learn more about polymers and how they form , go to this URL : -LRB- 2:13 -RRB- .
The smaller molecules are called monomers .
-LRB- The prefix mono means `` one , '' and the prefix poly means `` many . '' -RRB-
Polymers may consist of just one type of monomer or of more than one type .
Many polymers occur naturally .
Exploratorium Staff Scientist Julie Yu changes and manipulates the physical and chemical properties of plastic bottles by exposing them to heat .
This is how plastic bags and bottles can be recycled and used over and over again .
For more information on properties of plastic , see http://science.kqed.org/quest/video/quest-lab-properties-of-plas MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
Pure carbon can exist in different forms , depending on how its atoms are arranged .
The forms include diamond , graphite , and fullerenes .
The weak bonds between layers allow the layers to slide over one another .
This makes graphite relatively soft and slippery .
Fullerene A fullerene -LRB- also called a bucky - ball -RRB- is a form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in hol - low spheres .
Each carbon atom is bonded to three others by sin - gle covalent bonds .
The pattern of atoms resembles the pattern on the surface of a soccer ball .
Fullerenes were first discovered in 1985 .
All three forms exist as crystals , but they have different structures .
To learn how this form of carbon got its funny names , go to this URL : This metal cutter has a diamond blade .
Their different structures , in turn , give them different properties .
You can learn more about them in Table 9.1 . atoms affect the properties of the substances formed ?
Structure Diamond crystal Description Diamond Diamond is a form of carbon in which each carbon atom is bonded to four other carbon atoms .
This forms a strong , rigid , three - dimensional structure .
Graphite Graphite is a form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in layers .
Hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen .
This classification is based on the number of bonds between carbon atoms .
The size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their properties .
Hydrocarbons are generally nonpolar and do not dissolve in water .
Structural formulas are often used to represent hydrocarbon compounds because the molecules can have different shapes , or structures .
Hydrocarbons may form straight chains , branched chains , or rings .
Figure 9.8 shows an example of an alkane with each shape .
In straight-chain molecules , all the carbon atoms are lined up in a row like cars of a train .
In cyclic molecules , the chain of carbon atoms is joined at the two ends to form a ring .
However , rings can join together to create larger molecules consisting of two or more rings .
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain at least one double bond are called alkenes .
The name of a specific alkene always ends in ene , with a prefix indicating the number of carbon atoms .
Figure 9.10 shows the structural formula for the smallest alkene .
It has just two carbon atoms and is named ethene .
Ethene is produced by most fruits and vegetables .
Figure 9.11 shows the effects of ethene on bananas .
Alkenes can also form isomers , or compounds with the same atoms but different shapes .
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain at least one triple bond are called alkynes .
The name of specific alkynes always end in yne , with a prefix for the number of carbon atoms .
Figure 9.12 shows the smallest alkyne , called ethyne , which has just two carbon atoms .
Ethyne is also called acetylene .
It is burned in acetylene torches , like the one in Figure 9.13 .
Acetylene produces so much heat when it burns that it can melt metal .
Alkynes may form straight or branched chains .
Unsaturated cyclic hydrocarbons are called aromatic hydrocarbons .
Their molecules consist of six carbon atoms in a ring shape , connected by alternating single and double bonds .
Aromatic hydrocarbons may have a single ring or multiple rings joined together by bonds between their carbon atoms .
Hydrocarbons have even been called the driving force of western civilization .
Dead organisms in ancient seas gradually formed deposits of petroleum and natural gas .
Several other ways are illustrated in Figure 9.15 .
Gasoline , natural gas , fuel oil , diesel fuel , jet fuel , coal , kerosene , and propane are just some of the hydrocarbon compounds that are burned for fuel .
Hydrocarbons are also used to manufacture many products , including plastics and synthetic fabrics such as polyester .
Fossil fuels form over hundreds of millions of years when dead organisms are covered with sediments and put under great pressure .
Giant ferns in ancient swamps turned into coal deposits .
A biochemical compound is any carbon-based compound found in living things .
Like hydrocarbons , all biochemi - cal compounds contain hydrogen as well as carbon .
The classes are summarized in Table 9.3 and described in the rest of this lesson .
Class Carbohydrates Elements carbon hydrogen oxygen Examples sugars starches cellulose Proteins carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen sulfur carbon hydrogen oxygen carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen phosphorus enzymes hormones Lipids Nucleic acids Functions provide energy to cells store energy in plants makes up the cell walls of plants speed up biochemical re - actions regulate life processes fats oils store energy in animals store energy in plants DNA RNA stores genetic information in cells helps cells make proteins
However , biochemical compounds also contain other elements , such as oxygen and nitrogen .
Biochemical compounds make up the cells and tissues of organisms .
Carbohydrates are biochemical compounds that include sugars , starches , and cellulose .
Organisms use carbohydrates mainly for energy .
Glucose is the sugar that the cells of living things use for energy .
Living things that can not make glucose obtain it by consuming plants or these other organisms .
They consist of hundreds of glucose monomers bonded together .
Plants make starch to store extra sugars .
Consumers get starch from plants .
Common sources of starch in the human diet are pictured in Figure 9.17 .
However , the glucose molecules are bonded together differently in cellulose than they are in starches .
Cellulose molecules bundle together to form long , tough fibers -LRB- see Figure 9.18 -RRB- .
If you have , then you probably noticed that the stalks contain long , stringy fibers .
Cellulose also provides needed fiber in the human diet .
We cant digest cellulose , but it helps keep food wastes moving through the digestive tract .
Proteins are biochemical compounds that contain oxygen , nitrogen , and sulfur in addition to carbon and hydrogen .
Protein molecules consist of one or more chains of small molecules called amino acids .
The structural formula of the simplest amino acid , called glycine , is shown in Figure 9.19 .
The sequence of amino acids and the number of amino acid chains in a protein determine the proteins shape .
The shape of a protein , in turn , determines its function .
regulating life processes as hormones .
helping defend against infections as antibodies .
transporting materials as components of the blood -LRB- see the example in Figure 9.20 -RRB- .
Organisms use lipids to store energy .
In addition to carbon and hydrogen , lipids contain oxygen .
Lipids are made up of long carbon chains called fatty acids .
Unsaturated fatty acids are found in oils .
As a result , the carbons are saturated with hydrogen atoms .
Saturated fatty acids are found in fats .
As a result , some carbons are not bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible .
Some lipids contain the element phosphorus as well as oxygen , carbon , and hydrogen .
These lipids are called phospholipids .
These differences in polarity allow some molecules to pass through the membrane while keeping others out .
Two layers of phospholipid molecules make up most of the cell membrane in the cells of living things .
Figure 9.22 shows how phospholipid molecules are arranged in a cell membrane .
One end -LRB- the head -RRB- of each phospholipid molecule is polar and attracts water .
This end is called hydrophilic -LRB- `` water loving '' -RRB- .
The other end -LRB- the tail -RRB- is nonpolar and repels water .
This end is called hydrophobic -LRB- `` water hating '' -RRB- .
Nucleic acids are biochemical molecules that contain oxygen , nitrogen , and phosphorus in addition to carbon and hydrogen .
The structure of a nucleotide is shown in Figure 9.23 .
These bonds hold the two chains together and give DNA is characteristic double helix , or spiral , shape .
Sugars and phosphate groups form the `` backbone '' of each chain of DNA .
RNA , in contrast to DNA , consists of just one chain of nucleotides .
Each nucleotide contains a phosphate group -LRB- PO4 -RRB- , a sugar -LRB- C5 H8 O4 -RRB- in DNA , and a nitrogen - containing base .
In RNA , the only difference is that thymine is replaced with a different base , uracil .
DNA consists of two long chains of nucleotides .
Nitrogen bases on the two chains form hydrogen bonds with each other .
The instructions are encoded in the sequence of nitrogen bases in the nucleotide chains of DNA .
RNA `` reads '' the genetic code in DNA and is involved in the synthesis of proteins based on the code .
This video shows how : -LRB- 2:51 -RRB- .
Most of the energy used by living things comes either directly or indirectly from the sun .
Sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis .
How do living things get energy from glucose ?
This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms -LRB- see Figure 9.26 -RRB- synthesize glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- .
The process uses carbon dioxide and water and also produces oxygen .
The chemical energy is stored in the bonds of glucose molecules .
Glucose is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things .
Plants make their own glucose .
Other organisms get glucose by consuming plants -LRB- or organisms that consume plants -RRB- .
Cellular respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide , water , and energy .
It uses the rest of the energy to form many , even smaller molecules .
The smaller molecules contain just the right amount of energy to power chemical reactions inside cells .
You can look at cellular respiration in more detail at this URL : MEDIA Click image to the left or use the URL below .
At this temperature , most biochemical reactions would occur too slowly to keep us alive .
Thats where enzymes come in .
They speed up biochemical reactions , not only in humans but in virtually all living things .
Two are described in Figure 9.27 .
Acceleration is a measure of the change in velocity of a moving object .
Use your imagination to think of others .
Velocity , in turn , is a measure of the speed and direction of motion , so a change in velocity may reflect a change in speed , a change in direction , or both .
People commonly think of acceleration as in increase in speed , but a decrease in speed is also acceleration .
Q : Can you think of an example of acceleration that doesnt involve a change in speed ?
You can see several examples of acceleration in the pictures from the Figure 1.1 .
In each example , velocity is changing but in different ways .
Q : Describe how velocity is changing in each of the motions you identified from the Figure 1.1 .
For example , the boy on the carousel is moving up and down and around in a circle , so his direction is constantly changing , but his speed changes only at the beginning and end of the ride .
The skydiver is falling straight down toward the ground so her direction isnt changing , but her speed keeps increasing as she falls until she opens her parachute .
As the car speeds up , you feel as though you are being pressed against the seat .
If the car changes direction and turns right , you feel as though you are being pushed to the left .
The next time you ride in a car , notice how it feels as the car accelerates in each of these ways .
Gravity is a force that pulls objects down toward the ground .
When objects fall to the ground , gravity causes them to accelerate .
Gravity causes an object to fall toward the ground at a faster and faster velocity the longer the object falls .
In fact , its velocity increases by 9.8 m/s2 , so by 1 second after an object starts falling , its velocity is 9.8 m/s .
The acceleration of a falling object due to gravity is illustrated in the Figure 1.1 .
Q : In this diagram , the boy drops the object at time t = 0 s. By t = 1 s , the object is falling at a velocity of 9.8 m/s .
No , the bowling ball and basketball would reach the ground at the same time .
The more massive bowling ball is also harder to move because of its greater mass , so it ends up moving at the same acceleration as the soccer ball .
They all accelerate at the same rate due to gravity , unless air resistance affects one object more than another .
For example , a falling leaf is slowed down by air resistance more than a falling acorn because of the leafs greater surface area .
Q : If a leaf and an acorn were to fall to the ground in the absence of air -LRB- that is , in a vacuum -RRB- , how would this affect their acceleration due to gravity ?
If you were to hit four different golf balls toward an over-sized hole , all of them might land in the hole .
These shots would all be accurate because they all landed in the hole .
This is illustrated in the sketch below .
Each one landed in a different part of the hole .
The golf balls in the sketch below landed quite close together in a cluster , so they would be considered precise .
A : All four golf balls would land in the hole -LRB- accurate -RRB- and also very close to one another -LRB- precise -RRB- .
An acid is a compound that produces positive hydrogen ions -LRB- H + -RRB- and negative nonmetal ions when it dissolves in water .
-LRB- Ions are atoms that have become charged by losing or gaining electrons . -RRB-
This can be represented by the chemical equation : H O 2 HCl H + + Cl A base is a compound that produces negative hydroxide ions -LRB- OH -RRB- and positive metal ions when it dissolves in water .
For example , when the base sodium hydroxide -LRB- NaOH -RRB- dissolves in water , it produces negative hydroxide ions and positive sodium ions -LRB- Na + -RRB- .
This can be represented by the chemical equation : H O 2 NaOH OH + Na + Q : If you were to combine acid and base solutions , what products do you think would be produced ?
A : Combining acid and base solutions produces water and a neutral ionic compound .
When an acid and a base react , the reaction is called a neutralization reaction .
Thats because the reaction produces neutral products .
The reaction is represented by the chemical equation : CaCO3 + 2HCl H2 O + CaCl2 + CO2
Lets see how a neutralization reaction produces both water and a salt , using as an example the reaction between solutions of hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide .
Positive hydrogen ions from HCl and negative hydroxide ions from NaOH combine to form water .
This part of the reaction can be represented by the equation : H + + OH H2 O Positive sodium ions from NaOH and negative chloride ions from HCL combine to form the salt sodium chloride -LRB- NaCl -RRB- , commonly called table salt .
This part of the reaction can be represented by the equation : Na + + Cl NaCl Another example of a neutralization reaction can be seen in the Figure 1.1 .
Q : What products are produced when antacid tablets react with hydrochloric acid in the stomach ?
Chemical reactions also need energy to be activated .
Often , reactants have to overcome forces that push them apart .
This takes energy as well .
Still more energy is needed to start breaking bonds in reactants .
This energy is called activation energy .
For example , activation energy is needed to start a car engine .
Turning the key causes a spark that activates the burning of gasoline in the engine .
This happens only if the particles are moving , and movement takes energy .
Some chemical reactions need a constant input of energy to take place .
Only after it starts does the exothermic reaction produce more energy than it uses .
Other chemical reactions release energy when they occur , so they can keep going without any added energy .
Q : It makes sense that endothermic reactions need activation energy .
But do exothermic reactions also need activation energy ?
A : All chemical reactions need energy to get started , even exothermic reactions .
They compare energy changes that occur during endothermic and exothermic reactions .
From the graphs , you can see that both types of reactions need the same amount of activation energy in order to get started .
You have probably used activation energy to start a chemical reaction .
For example , if youve ever struck a match to light it , then you provided the activation energy needed to start a combustion reaction .
Once a match starts to burn , it releases enough energy to activate the next reaction , and the next , and so on .
Barium -LRB- Ba -RRB- is one of six elements in group 2 of the periodic table , which is shown in Figure 1.1 .
Elements in this group are called alkaline Earth metals .
They readily give up their two valence electrons to achieve a full outer energy level , which is the most stable arrangement of electrons .
A : It takes more energy to remove two valence electrons from an atom than one valence electron .
For example , alkaline Earth metals will react with cold water , but not explosively as alkali metals do .
Because of their reactivity , alkaline Earth metals never exist as pure substances in nature .
Thats because the atoms get bigger from the top to the bottom , so the valence electrons are farther from the nucleus .
When valence electrons are farther from the nucleus , they are attracted less strongly by the nucleus and more easily removed from the atom .
This makes the atom more reactive .
Adults who dont get enough calcium may develop a condition called osteoporosis , in which the bones lose calcium and become weak and brittle .
In fireworks , strontium compounds produce deep red explosions .
In toothpaste , the compound strontium chloride reduces tooth sensitivity .
Although pure calcium doesnt exist in nature , calcium compounds are very common in Earths crust and in sea water .
Calcium is also the most abundant metal in the human body , occurring as calcium compounds such as calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate .
These calcium compounds are found in bones and make them hard and strong .
The skeleton of the average adult contains about a kilogram of calcium .
Because calciumlike bariumabsorbs x-rays , bones show up white in x-ray images .
Good food sources of calcium are pictured in Figure Q : What health problems might result from a diet low in calcium ?
A : Children who dont get enough calcium while their bones are forming may develop a deficiency disease called rickets , in which their bones are softer than normal and become bent and stunted .
An alloy is formed by melting a metal and dissolving the other elements in it .
Several examples of alloys are described and pictured below .
Most metal objects are made of alloys rather than pure metals .
Objects made of four different alloys are shown in the Figure 1.1 .
`` Gold '' bracelet : Pure gold is relatively soft , so it is rarely used for jewelry .
Most `` gold '' jewelry is actually made of an alloy of gold , copper and silver .
Both copper and tin are relatively soft metals , but mixed together in bronze they are much harder .
Bronze has been used for statues , coins , and other objects .
Q : Sterling silver is an alloy that is used to make fine jewelry .
What elements do you think sterling silver contains ?
What properties might sterling silver have that make it more useful than pure silver ?
Sterling silver is harder and stronger than pure silver , while retaining the malleability and luster of pure silver .
Brass is used for shap - ing many other curved objects , such as doorknobs and plumbing fixtures .
Stain - less steel sink : Stainless steel is a type of steel that contains nickel and chromium in addition to carbon and iron .
This makes it useful for sinks , eating utensils , and other objects that are exposed to wa - ter .
To become more stable , the nuclei undergo radioactive decay .
In radioactive decay , the nuclei give off , or emit , radiation in the form of energy and often particles as well .
There are several types of radioactive decay , including alpha , beta , and gamma decay .
Energy is emitted in all three types of decay , but only alpha and beta decay also emit particles .
Alpha decay occurs when a nucleus is unstable because it has too many protons .
The Figure 1.1 shows what happens during alpha decay .
The nucleus emits an alpha particle and energy .
An alpha particle consists of two protons and two neutrons , which is actually a helium nucleus .
Radioactive nuclei and particles are represented by nuclear symbols that indicate their numbers of protons and neutrons .
For example , an alpha particle -LRB- helium nucleus -RRB- is represented by the symbol 42 He , where He is the chemical symbol for helium , the subscript 2 is the number of protons , and the superscript 4 is the mass number -LRB- 2 protons + 2 neutrons -RRB- .
The alpha particle -LRB- 42 He -RRB- produced in the reaction can join with two free electrons to form the element helium .
This means that the new element produced in the reaction has 82 protons .
Nuclear symbols are used to write nuclear equations for radioactive decay .
Uranium-238 undergoes alpha decay to become thorium-234 .
-LRB- The numbers following the chemical names refer to the number of protons plus neutrons . -RRB-
In this reaction , uranium-238 loses two protons and two neutrons to become the element thorium-234 .
The reaction can be represented by this nuclear equation : 238 U 92 4 234 90 Th + 2 He + Energy If you count the number of protons -LRB- subscripts -RRB- as well as the number of protons plus neutrons -LRB- superscripts -RRB- , youll see that the total numbers are the same on both sides of the arrow .
This means that the equation is balanced .
The thorium-234 produced in this reaction is also unstable , so it will undergo radioactive decay as well .
All types of radioactive decay pose risks to living things , but alpha decay is the least dangerous .
However , if alpha particles are emitted inside the body , they can do more damage .
One way this can happen is by inhaling cigarette smoke .
People who smoke actually inhale the radioactive element polonium-210 .
It undergoes alpha decay in the lungs .
Over time , exposure to alpha particles may cause lung cancer .
Did you ever notice when you get into a bathtub of water that the level of the water rises ?
More than 2000 years ago , a Greek mathematician named Archimedes noticed the same thing .
He observed that both a body and the water in a tub cant occupy the same space at the same time .
As a result , some of the water is displaced , or moved out of the way .
Archimedes determined that the volume of displaced water equals the volume of the submerged object .
So more water is displaced by a bigger body than a smaller one .
Q : If you jump into swimming pool , how much water does your body displace ?
Objects such as ships may float in a fluid like water because of buoyant force .
This is an upward force that a fluid exerts on any object that is placed in it .
Archimedes discovered that the buoyant force acting on an object equals the weight of the fluid displaced by the object .
This is known as Archimedes law -LRB- or Archimedes principle -RRB- .
Archimedes law explains why some objects float in fluids even though they are very heavy .
As a result , the buoyant force is greater than the force of gravity acting on the ship , so the ship floats .
A : You would displace more water by stretching out your body , so there would be more buoyant force acting on it .
The cruise ship pictured in the opening image is extremely heavy , yet it stays afloat .
If a steel ball with the same weight as the ship were placed in water , it would sink to the bottom .
This is modeled in the Figure 1.1 .
The reason the ball sinks is that its shape is very compact , so it displaces relatively little water .
The volume of water displaced by the steel ball weighs less than the ball itself , so the buoyant force is not as great as the force of gravity pulling down on the ball .
Now look at the ships hull in the Figure 1.1 .
Its shape causes the ship to displace much more water than the ball .
If youre like most people , you dont give it a thought when you flick a switch to turn on a lightat least not until the power goes out and youre left in the dark !
When you flick on a light switch , electricity normally flows through the light , and some type of light bulb converts the electrical energy to visible light .
This can happen in various ways , depending on the type of light bulb .
Several different types of light bulbs are described below .
All of them are examples of artificial light , as opposed to natural light from the sun or other sources in nature .
An incandescent light bulb like the one pictured in the Figure 1.1 produces visible light by incandescence .
Incan - descence occurs when something gets so hot that it glows .
An incandescent light bulb contains a thin wire filament made of tungsten .
When electric current passes through the filament , it gets extremely hot and emits light .
A fluorescent light bulb produces visible light by fluorescence .
Fluorescence occurs when a substance absorbs shorter-wavelength ultraviolet light and then gives off the energy as visible light .
The compact fluorescent light bulb -LRB- CFL -RRB- in the Figure 1.2 contains mercury gas that gives off ultraviolet light when electricity passes through it .
Phosphor absorbs the ultraviolet light and then gives off most of the energy as visible light .
A neon light produces visible light by electroluminescence .
Other halogen gases besides neonincluding krypton and argonalso produce light in this way .
It is a long glass tube that contains neon gas .
When electricity passes through the gas , it excites electrons of neon atoms , and the electrons jump to a higher energy level .
As the excited electrons return to their original energy level , they give off visible light .
Other gases produce light of different colors .
A vapor light also produces visible light by electroluminescence The bulb contains a small amount of solid sodium or mercury as well as a mixture of neon and argon gases .
Sodium vapor lights , like the streetlight pictured in the Figure 1.4 , produce yellowish light .
In addition to lighting city streets , vapor lights are used to light highways and stadiums .
An LED light contains a material called a semi-conductor , which gives off visible light when an electric current flows through it .
LED lights are used for traffic lights -LRB- see Figure 1.5 -RRB- and also indicator lights on computers , cars , and many other devices .
Q : Some light bulbs produce a lot of heat in addition to visible light , so they waste energy .
Other bulbs produce much less heat , so they use energy more efficiently .
Which light bulbs described above would you place in each category ?
A : Incandescent light bulbs , which produce light by incandescence , give off a lot of heat as well as light , so they waste energy .
The other light bulbs produce light by some type of luminescence , in which light is produced without heat .
Electromagnetic force is a force of attraction or repulsion between all electrically charged particles .
This force is transferred between charged particles of matter by fundamental force-carrying particles called photons .
Because of electromagnetic force , particles with opposite charges attract each other and particles with the same charge repel each other .
The model of an atom in the Figure 1.1 shows both types of charged particles .
Protons are found inside the nucleus at the center of the atom , and they give the nucleus a positive charge .
Negative electrons stay in the area surrounding the positive nucleus because of the electromagnetic force of attraction between them .
Q : Why do you think protons cluster together in the nucleus of the atom instead of repelling each other because of their like charges ?
A : The electromagnetic force of repulsion between positively charged protons is overcome by a stronger force , called the strong nuclear force .
The strong nuclear force is a force of attraction between fundamental particles called quarks , which have a type of charge called color charge .
The strong nuclear force is transferred between quarks by fundamental force-carrying particles called gluons .
This puts an upper limit on the number of protons an atom can have and remain stable .
This makes the nucleus unstable , or radioactive , so it breaks down .
The following video discusses the strong nuclear force and its role in the atom .
The types of quarks found in protons and neutrons are called up quarks -LRB- u -RRB- and down quarks -LRB- d -RRB- .
Each proton consists of two up quarks and one down quark -LRB- uud -RRB- , and each neutron consists of one up quark and two down quarks -LRB- udd -RRB- .
This diagram represents two protons .
Both protons and neutrons consist of quarks .
The exchange of gluons holds quarks together within a proton or neutron .
The strong nuclear force is strong enough to overcome the electromagnetic force of repulsion pushing protons apart .
Both forces are represented in the Figure 1.2 .
The strong nuclear force works only over very short distances .
As more protons are added to the nucleus , the electromagnetic force of repulsion between them gets stronger , while the strong nuclear force of attraction between them gets weaker .
The weak nuclear force is transferred by the exchange of force-carrying fundamental particles called W and Z bosons .
This force is also a very short-range force that works only within the nucleus of the atom .
Unlike these other two forces , the weak nuclear force does not bind subatomic particles together in an atom .
The Figure 1.3 shows one way this can happen .
This changes the proton -LRB- uud -RRB- to a neutron -LRB- udd -RRB- .
Q : If the weak force causes a proton to change to a neutron , how does this change the atom ?
A : The resulting atom represents a different element .
The nucleus -LRB- plural , nuclei -RRB- is a positively charged region at the center of the atom .
It consists of two types of subatomic particles packed tightly together .
Outside of the nucleus , an atom is mostly empty space , with orbiting negative particles called electrons whizzing through it .
Given its great mass and tiny size , the nucleus is very dense .
Particles with opposite electric charges attract each other .
This explains why negative electrons orbit the positive nucleus .
Particles with the same electric charge repel each other .
This means that the positive protons in the nucleus push apart from one another .
A : When an atomic bomb explodes , the nuclei of atoms undergo a process called fission , in which they split apart .
This releases the huge amount of energy that was holding together subatomic particles in the nucleus .
The symbol comes from the Latin name for potassium , which is kalium .
The symbols in the table above would be more useful if they revealed more information about the atoms they represent .
For example , it would be useful to know the numbers of protons and neutrons in the atoms .
Elements are pure substances that make up all other matter , so each one is given a unique name .
The names of elements are also represented by unique one - or two-letter symbols , such as H for hydrogen , C for carbon , and He for helium .
Q : The table shown above is called the periodic table of the elements .
Each symbol stands for a different element .
A : The symbol K stands for the element potassium .
That number is the mass number , which is the mass of the atom in a unit called the atomic mass unit -LRB- amu -RRB- .
Atoms with the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes .
Because the number of neutrons can vary for a given element , the mass numbers of different atoms of an element may also vary .
Therefore , they have a different mass number than the one given in the box above .
A neutron has just a tiny bit more mass than a proton , so its mass is often assumed to be one atomic mass unit as well .
Therefore , the total number of protons and neutrons in an atom determines its mass in atomic mass units .
A chemical equation represents the changes that occur during a chemical reaction .
A chemical equation has the general form : Reactants Products An example of a simple chemical reaction is the reaction in which hydrogen -LRB- H2 -RRB- and oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- combine to produce water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- .
To write the chemical equation for this reaction , you would start by writing the reactants on the left and the product on the right , with an arrow between them to show the direction in which the reaction occurs : Equation 1 : H2 + O2 H2 O Q : Look closely at equation 1 .
This means that there must be the same number of each type of atom on both sides of the arrow .
Thats because mass is always conserved in chemical reactions .
Count the number of hydrogen and oxygen atoms on each side of the arrow .
For example , two molecules of hydrogen would be written as 2 H2 , and two molecules of water would be written 2 H2 O.
Coefficients can be used to balance equation 1 -LRB- above -RRB- as follows : Equation 2 : 2 H2 + O2 2 H2 O Equation 2 shows that two molecules of hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to produce two molecules of water .
The two molecules of hydrogen each contain two hydrogen atoms and so do the two molecules of water .
Q : Balance this chemical equation for the reaction in which nitrogen -LRB- N2 -RRB- and hydrogen -LRB- H2 -RRB- combine to form ammonia -LRB- NH3 -RRB- : N2 + H2 NH3 A : First count the nitrogen atoms on both sides of the arrow .
Place the coefficient 2 in front of NH3 to balance nitrogen : N2 + H2 2 NH3 Now count the hydrogen atoms on both sides of the arrow .
Place coefficients , as needed , in front of the symbols or formulas to increase the number of atoms or molecules of the substances .
In radioactive decay , the nuclei emit energy and usually particles of matter as well .
Beta decay occurs when an unstable nucleus emits a beta particle and energy .
A : In beta-minus decay an atom gains a proton , and it beta-plus decay it loses a proton .
In each case , the atom becomes a different element because it has a different number of protons .
An electron is a negatively charged particle , and a positron is a positively charged electron -LRB- or anti- electron -RRB- .
When the beta particle is an electron , the decay is called beta-minus decay .
When the beta particle is a positron , the decay is called beta-plus decay .
Beta-minus decay occurs when a nucleus has too many neutrons relative to protons , and beta-plus decay occurs when a nucleus has too few neutrons relative to protons .
Q : Nuclei contain only protons and neutrons , so how can a nucleus emit an electron in beta-minus decay or a positron in beta-plus decay ?
A : Beta decay begins with a proton or neutron .
Q : How does beta decay change an atom to a different element ?
Radioactive nuclei and particles are represented by nuclear symbols . . For example , a beta-minus particle -LRB- electron -RRB- is represented by the symbol 01 e . The subscript -1 represents the particles charge , and the superscript 0 shows that the particle has virtually no mass -LRB- no protons or neutrons -RRB- .
A : Along with another electron , it can combine with an alpha particle to form a helium atom .
An alpha particle , which is emitted during alpha decay , consists of two protons and two neutrons .
Q : Try to balance the following nuclear equation for beta-minus decay by filling in the missing subscript and superscript .
This reaction is represented by the equation : 234 Th 90 0 234 91 Pa + 1 e + energy The equation shows that thorium-234 becomes protactinium-234 and loses a beta particle and energy .
The protactinium - 234 produced in the reaction is also radioactive , so it will decay as well .
A nuclear equation is balanced if the total numbers of protons and neutrons are the same on both sides of the arrow .
Q : What happens to the electron produced in the reaction above ?
Beta particles can travel about a meter through air .
The prefix bio - comes from the Greek word that means life .
In fact the similarity in biochemical compounds between living things provides some of the best evidence for the evolution of species from common ancestors .
A classic example is the biochemical compound called cytochrome c . It is found in all living organisms because it performs essential life functions .
Only slight variations in the molecule exist between closely related species , as you can see in the Figure and the single-celled tetrahymena -LRB- pictured in the Figure 1.1 -RRB- , the cytochrome c molecule is nearly 50 percent the same .
A biochemical compound is any carbon-based compound that is found in living things .
Biochemical compounds make up the cells and tissues of living things .
They are also involved in all life processes , including making and using food for energy .
Q : Plants make food in the process of photosynthesis .
What biochemical compound is synthesized in photosynthe - sis ?
A : Glucose is synthesized in photosynthesis .
Virtually all living things use glucose for energy , but glucose is just one of many examples of biochemical compounds that are found in most or all living things .
All biochemical molecules contain hydrogen and oxygen as well as carbon .
Glucose is a monomer of biochemical compounds called starches .
In starches and all other biochemical polymers , monomers are joined together by covalent bonds , in which atoms share pairs of valence electrons .
The largest known biochemical molecule is called titin .
The human form of the molecule contains more than 34,000 monomers .
Its chemical name contains almost 190,000 letters , and it has been called the longest word in any language .
Although there are millions of biochemical compounds , all of them can be grouped into just four main classes : carbohydrates , proteins , lipids , and nucleic acids .
The classes are summarized in the Table 1.1 .
Class Carbohydrates Elements carbon hydrogen oxygen Examples sugars starches cellulose Proteins carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen sulfur carbon hydrogen oxygen carbon hydrogen oxygen nitrogen phosphorus enzymes hormones Lipids Nucleic acids Functions provide energy to cells store energy in plants makes up the cell walls of plants speed up biochemical re - actions regulate life processes fats oils store energy in animals store energy in plants DNA RNA stores genetic information in cells helps cells make proteins Q : In which class of biochemical compounds would you place glucose ?
Q : Look back at the chemical formula for titin .
Chemical reactions that take place inside living things are called biochemical reactions -LRB- bio - means life -RRB- .
Its not just for energy that living things depend on biochemical reactions .
Every function and structure of a living organism depends on thousands of biochemical reactions taking place in each cell .
The sum of all these biochemical reactions is called metabolism .
Each of the trillions of cells in your body is continuously performing thousands of catabolic and anabolic reactions .
Thats an amazing number of biochemical reactionsfar more than the number of reactions that might take place in a lab or factory .
How can so many biochemical reactions take place simultaneously in our cells ?
A : So many reactions can occur because biochemical reactions are amazingly fast .
Q : In a lab or factory , reactants can be heated to very high temperatures or placed under great pressure so they will react very quickly .
These ways of speeding up chemical reactions cant occur inside the delicate cells of living things .
Larger molecules are broken down to smaller ones .
Catabolic reactions release energy , so they are exothermic .
Anabolic reactions involve forming bonds .
Smaller molecules are combined to form larger ones .
For example , simple sugars are combined to form complex carbohydrates .
Anabolic reactions require energy , so they are endothermic .
Enzymes are proteins that increase the rate of chemical reactions by reducing the amount of activation energy needed for reactants to start reacting .
Enzymes are synthesized in the cells that need them , based on instructions encoded in the cells DNA .
Enzymes arent changed or used up in the reactions they catalyze , so they can be used to speed up the same reaction over and over again .
Together , these two processes provide energy to almost all of Earths organisms .
In photosynthesis , light energy from the sun is converted to stored chemical energy in glucose .
In cellular respiration , stored energy is released from glucose and stored in smaller amounts that cells can use .
They combine using energy from light to produce oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- and glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- .
They combine to produce carbon dioxide , water , and energy .
The existence of the atom was first demonstrated around 1800 by John Dalton .
Then , close to a century went by before J.J. Thomson discovered the first subatomic particle , the negatively charged electron .
Although later scientists would develop more refined atomic models , Bohrs model was basically correct and much of it is still accepted today .
It is also a very useful model because it explains the properties of different elements .
Bohr received the 1922 Nobel prize in physics for his contribution to our understanding of the structure of the atom .
Because atoms are neutral in charge , Thomson thought that they must consist of a sphere of positive charge with electrons scattered through it .
In 1910 , Ernest Rutherford showed that this idea was incorrect .
He demonstrated that all of the positive charge of an atom is actually concentrated in a tiny central region called the nucleus .
Rutherford surmised that electrons move around the nucleus like planets around the sun .
Rutherford focused on the nucleus and didnt really clarify where the electrons were in the empty space surrounding the nucleus .
The next major advance in atomic history occurred in 1913 , when the Danish scientist Niels Bohr published a description of a more detailed model of the atom .
His model identified more clearly where electrons could be found .
As a young man , Bohr worked in Rutherfords lab in England .
However , an electron could never exist in between two energy levels .
These ideas are illustrated in the Figure 1.2 .
Just as you can stand only on the rungs and not in between them , electrons can orbit the nucleus only at fixed distances from the nucleus and not in between them .
He hypothesized that electrons can move around the nucleus only at fixed distances from the nucleus based on the amount of energy they have .
In other words , the shells consisted of sphere within sphere within sphere .
Furthermore , electrons with less energy would be found at lower energy levels , closer to the nucleus .
Those with more energy would be found at higher energy levels , farther from the nucleus .
Bohr also hypothesized that if an electron absorbed just the right amount of energy , it would jump to the next higher energy level .
Bohrs model of the atom is actually a combination of two different ideas : Rutherfords atomic model of electrons orbiting the nucleus and German scientist Max Plancks idea of a quantum , which Planck published in 1901 .
A quantum -LRB- plural , quanta -RRB- is the minimum amount of energy that can be absorbed or released by matter .
However , what scientists already knew about matter may have made it easier for them to accept the idea of energy quanta .
A : Scientists already knew that matter exists in discrete units called atoms .
This idea had been demonstrated by John Dalton around 1800 .
Knowing this may have made it easier for scientists to accept the idea that energy exists in discrete units as well .
If energy were water and you wanted to add it to matter in the form of a drinking glass , you couldnt simply pour the water continuously into the glass .
Bohr reasoned that if electrons can absorb or lose only fixed quantities of energy , then they must vary in their energy by these fixed amounts .
Thus , they can occupy only fixed energy levels around the nucleus that correspond to quantum increases in energy .
The concen - tric circles actually represent concentric spheres .
Q : The idea that energy is transferred only in discrete units , or quanta , was revolutionary when Max Planck first proposed it in 1901 .
Covalent bonds are chemical bonds between atoms of nonmetals that share valence electrons .
The two oxygen nuclei have an equal force of attraction for their four shared electrons .
These are called polar covalent bonds .
The Figure than the hydrogen atoms do because the nucleus of the oxygen atom has more positively charged protons .
As a result , the oxygen atom becomes slightly negative in charge , and the hydrogen atoms become slightly positive in charge .
These bonds are called nonpolar covalent bonds .
As a result , the atoms remain neutral in charge .
A : The symmetrical arrangement of atoms in carbon dioxide results in opposites sides of the molecule having the same charge .
This is illustrated in the Figure 1.3 .
In both molecules , the oxygen atoms attract electrons more strongly than the carbon or hydrogen atoms do , so both molecules have polar bonds .
The ability of fluids to exert this force is called buoyancy .
A fluid exerts pressure in all directions , but the pressure is greater at greater depth .
Buoyant force explains why the girl pictured above can float in water .
Q : Youve probably noticed that some things dont float in water .
For example , if you drop a stone in water , it will sink to the bottom rather than floating .
Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling down on an object , whereas buoyant force pushes up on an object .
On the right , the objects weight is greater than the buoyant force acting on it , so the object sinks .
Density , or the amount of mass in a given volume , is also related to the ability of an object to float .
This explains why the giant ice berg in the Figure 1.3 is floating in the ocean .
Q : Can you think of more examples of substances that float in a fluid because they are low in density ?
A : Oil is less dense than water , so oil from a spill floats on ocean water .
Helium is less dense than air , so balloons filled with helium float in air .
A change in an objects motionsuch as Xander speeding up on his scooteris called acceleration .
Acceleration occurs whenever an object is acted upon by an unbalanced force .
The greater the net force acting on the object , the greater its acceleration will be , but the mass of the object also affects its acceleration .
Newtons second law of motion summarizes these relationships .
According to this law , the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on it divided by its mass .
This can be represented by the equation : Acceleration = Net force Mass or a = F m
This equation for acceleration can be used to calculate the acceleration of an object that is acted on by a net force .
Assume that the net force acting on Xander and the scooter is 25 Newtons .
Substitute the relevant values into the equation for acceleration : F = 25 N = 0.5 N a = m 50 kg kg The Newton is the SI unit for force .
It is defined as the force needed to cause a 1-kilogram mass to accelerate at 1 m/s2 .
Therefore , force can also be expressed in the unit kg m/s2 .
This way of expressing force can be substituted for Newtons in Xanders acceleration so the answer is expressed in the SI unit for acceleration , which is m/s2 : 2 0.5 kgm/s a = 0.5 kgN = = 0.5 m/s2 kg Q : Why are there no kilograms in the final answer to this problem ?
A : The kilogram units in the numerator and denominator of the fraction cancel out .
As a result , the answer is expressed in the correct SI units for acceleration .
Mass can be measured with a balance , and average acceleration can be calculated from velocity and time .
Therefore , it may be more useful to know how to calculate the net force acting on an object from its mass and acceleration .
The equation for acceleration above can be rewritten to solve for net force as : Net Force = Mass Acceleration , or F = ma Look at Xander in the Figure 1.1 .
Hes riding his scooter down a ramp .
Substitute the relevant values into the equation for force to find the answer : F = m a = 50 kg 0.8 m/s2 = 40 kg m/s2 , or 40 N Q : If Xander and his scooter actually had a mass of 40 kg instead of 50 kg , how much force would it take for him to accelerate at 0.8 m/s2 ?
Calculating acceleration is complicated if both speed and direction are changing or if you want to know acceleration at any given instant in time .
Then acceleration is the change in velocity -LRB- represented by v -RRB- divided by the change in time -LRB- represented by t -RRB- : acceleration = v t
Look at the cyclist in the Figure 1.1 .
v t 6 m/s 1 m/s = 5s 5 m/s = 5s 1 m/s = 1s = 1 m/s2 acceleration = In words , this means that for each second the cyclist travels downhill , his velocity -LRB- in this case , his speed -RRB- increases by 1 meter per second on average .
Note that the answer to this problem is expressed in m/s2 , which is the SI unit for acceleration .
Q : The cyclist slows down at the end of the race .
A : Use the equation given above for acceleration : v t 6 m/s 2 m/s = 4s 4 m/s = 4s 1 m/s = 1s = 1 m/s2 acceleration =
Work is the use of force to move an object .
It is directly related to both the force applied to the object and the distance the object moves .
Work can be calculated with this equation : Work = Force x Distance .
The equation for work can be used to calculate work if force and distance are known .
To use the equation , force is expressed in Newtons -LRB- N -RRB- , and distance is expressed in meters -LRB- m -RRB- .
For example , assume that Clarissa uses 100 Newtons of force to push the mower and that she pushes it for a total of 200 meters as she cuts the grass in her grandmothers yard .
This is the SI unit for work , also called the joule -LRB- J -RRB- .
One joule equals the amount of work that is done when 1 N of force moves an object over a distance of 1 m. Q : After Clarissa mows her grandmothers lawn , she volunteers to mow a neighbors lawn as well .
A : The work Clarissa does can be calculated as : Work = 100 N 234 m = 23,400 N m , or 23,400 J
The work equation given above can be rearranged to find force or distance if the other variables are known : Force = Work Distance Distance = Work Force After Clarissa finishes mowing both lawns , she pushes the lawn mower down the sidewalk to her own house .
Substitute the known values into the equation for force : J Force = 2700 30 m = 90 N Q : When Clarissa gets back to her house , she hangs the 200-Newton lawn mower on some hooks in the garage -LRB- see the Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
How far does she lift the mower to hang it ?
A : Substitute the known values into the equation for distance :
In addition to cellulose , carbohydrates include sugars and starches .
Carbohydrate molecules contain atoms of carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen .
Living things use carbohydrates mainly for energy .
However , body cells use only sugars for energy .
Q : Compare the structure of sucrose with the structures of glucose and fructose .
A : Sucrose consists of one molecule of glucose and one molecule of fructose bonded together .
In the Figure 1.1 , you can see structural formulas for glucose and two other sugars , named fructose and sucrose .
Fructose is a sugar that is found in fruits .
Do you see how the atoms are arranged differently in fructose than in glucose ?
A polymer is a large molecule that consists of many smaller , repeating molecules , called monomers .
The monomers are joined together by covalent bonds .
Consumers get starches by eating plants .
Common sources of starches in the human diet are pictured in the Figure 1.2 .
Cellulose molecules bundle together to form long , tough fibers , as you can see in the Figure 1.3 .
the stalks contain long , stringy fibers .
Carbon is a very common ingredient of matter because it can combine with itself and with many other elements .
It can form a great diversity of compounds , ranging in size from just a few atoms to thousands of atoms .
In a covalent bond , two atoms share a pair of electrons .
By forming four covalent bonds , carbon shares four pairs of electrons , thus filling its outer energy level and achieving stability .
The valence electrons of carbon are shown in the electron dot diagram in the Figure 1.1 .
A : Carbon needs four more valence electrons , or a total of eight valence electrons , to fill its outer energy level .
Q : How can carbon achieve a full outer energy level ?
Covalent bonds are chemical bonds that form between nonmetals .
A carbon atom can form covalent bonds with other carbon atoms or with the atoms of other elements .
Carbon often forms bonds with hydrogen .
Compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen are called hydrocarbons .
Methane -LRB- CH4 -RRB- , which is modeled in the Figure 1.2 , is an example of a hydrocarbon .
The diagram on the right in the Figure 1.2 , called a structural formula , represents each pair of shared electrons with a dash -LRB- - -RRB- .
Examples of compounds with these types of bonds are represented by the structural formulas in the Figure 1.3 .
Q : How many bonds do the carbon atoms share in each of these compounds ?
A : In ethane , the two carbon atoms share a single bond .
Carbon has a unique ability to form covalent bonds with many other atoms .
Because of this ability , carbon often forms polymers .
A polymer is a large molecule that is made out of many smaller molecules that are joined together by covalent bonds .
The smaller , repeating molecules are called monomers .
-LRB- The prefix mono - means one and the prefix poly - means many . -RRB-
Polymers are similar to the strings of beads pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Q : How are the glucose molecules arranged in the cellulose polymer ?
Rubber is a natural polymer of the monomer named isoprene -LRB- C5 H8 -RRB- .
This polymer comes from rubber trees , which grow in tropical areas .
Structural formulas for rubber and isoprene are shown in the Figure 1.2 .
Note that just a small section of the rubber polymer is represented by the structural formula .
Cellulose is a natural polymer of the monomer named glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- .
This polymer makes up the cell walls of plants and is the most common compound in living things .
Structural formulas for cellulose and glucose are also shown in the Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
As you can see from the structural formula for cellulose , when two glucose monomers bond together , a molecule of water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- is released .
Synthetic carbon polymers are produced in labs or factories .
You are probably familiar with the plastic called polyethylene .
All of the plastic items pictured in the Figure 1.3 are made of polyethylene .
Structural formulas for ethylene and polyethylene are also shown in the Figure 1.4 .
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction .
The presence of a catalyst is one of several factors that influence the rate of chemical reactions .
-LRB- Other factors include the temperature , concentration , and surface area of reactants . -RRB-
A : Like a tunnel through a mountain , a catalyst provides a faster pathway for a chemical reaction to occur .
Catalysts interact with reactants so the reaction can occur by an alternate pathway that has a lower activation energy .
Activation energy is the energy needed to start a reaction .
Therefore , the reaction will occur faster by this pathway because more reactants will have enough energy to react .
When activation energy is lower , more reactant particles have enough energy to react so the reaction goes faster .
The catalyst brings the reactants together by temporarily bonding with them .
This makes it easier and quicker for the reactants to react together .
Q : In the Figure 1.1 , look at the energy needed in the catalytic and non-catalytic pathways of the reaction .
How does this affect the reaction rate along each pathway ?
A : The catalytic pathway of the reaction requires far less energy .
Chemical reactions constantly occur inside living things .
Many of these reactions require catalysts so they will occur quickly enough to support life .
A : The starches in the cracker start to break down to sugars with the help of the enzyme amylase .
A reaction that takes a split second to occur with an enzyme might take many years without it !
Many enzymes are needed for the digestion of food .
An example is amylase , which is found in the mouth and small intestine .
Amylase catalyzes the breakdown of starch to sugar .
You can see how it affects the rate of starch digestion in the Figure 1.2 .
Cellular Respiration is the process in which the cells of living things break down the organic compound glucose with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water .
The overall chemical equation for cellular respiration is : C6 H12 O6 + 6O2 6CO2 + 6H2 O As the Figure 1.1 shows , cellular respiration occurs in the cells of all kinds of organisms , including those that make their own food -LRB- autotrophs -RRB- as well as those that get their food by consuming other organisms -LRB- heterotrophs -RRB- .
Q : How is cellular respiration related to breathing ?
A : Breathing consists of inhaling and exhaling , and its purpose is to move gases into and out of the body .
Oxygen needed for cellular respiration is brought into the body with each inhalation .
Carbon dioxide and water vapor produced by cellular respiration are released from the body with each exhalation .
In catabolic reactions , bonds are broken in larger molecules and energy is released .
In cellular respiration , bonds are broken in glucose , and this releases the chemical energy that was stored in the glucose bonds .
Some of this energy is converted to heat .
The rest of the energy is used to form many small molecules of a compound called adenosine triphosphate , or ATP .
ATP molecules contain just the right amount of stored chemical energy to power biochemical reactions inside cells .
Bonds form when atoms share or transfer valence electrons .
Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that may be involved in chemical interactions .
A : Chemical bonds form because they give atoms a more stable arrangement of electrons .
To understand why chemical bonds form , consider the common compound known as water , or H2 O.
It explains why elements form chemical bonds with each other .
Not all chemical bonds form in the same way as the bonds in water .
There are actually three different types of chemical bonds , called covalent , ionic , and metallic bonds .
The ions and electrons form a lattice-like structure .
Only metals , such as the copper pictured in the Figure 1.2 , form metallic bonds .
Each type of bond is described below .
URL : A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two nonmetal atoms that share a pair of electrons .
One electron is provided by each atom , and the pair of electrons is attracted to the positive nuclei of both atoms .
The water molecule represented in the Figure 1.1 contains covalent bonds .
An ionic bond is the force of attraction that holds together oppositely charged ions .
Ionic bonds form crystals instead of molecules .
Table salt contains ionic bonds .
The general form of a chemical equation is : Reactants Products The reactants in a chemical equation are the substances that begin the reaction , and the products are the substances that are produced in the reaction .
The reactants are always written on the left side of the equation and the products on the right .
The arrow pointing from left to right shows that the reactants change into the products during the reaction .
This happens when chemical bonds break in the reactants and new bonds form in the products .
As a result , the products are different chemical substances than the reactants that started the reaction .
A : Iron combines with oxygen to produce rust , which is the compound named iron oxide .
This reaction could be represented by the general chemical equation below .
Note that when there is more than one reactant , they are separated by plus signs -LRB- + -RRB- .
When scientists write chemical equations , they use chemical symbols and chemical formulas instead of names to represent reactants and products .
Look at the chemical reaction illustrated in the Figure 1.1 .
In this reaction , carbon reacts with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide .
Carbon is represented by the chemical symbol C . The chemical symbol for oxygen is O , but pure oxygen exists as diatomic -LRB- two-atom -RRB- molecules , represented by the chemical formula O2 .
A molecule of the compound carbon dioxide consists of one atom of carbon and two atoms of oxygen , so carbon dioxide is represented by the chemical formula CO2 .
A : The chemical equation is : C + O2 CO2 Q : How have the atoms of the reactants been rearranged in the products of the reaction ?
A : Bonds between the oxygen atoms in the oxygen molecule have been broken , and new bonds have formed between the carbon atom and the two oxygen atoms .
Thats because matter is always conserved in a chemical reaction .
Lets return to the chemical reaction in which iron -LRB- Fe -RRB- combines with oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- to form rust , or iron oxide -LRB- Fe2 O3 -RRB- .
The equation for this reaction is : 4Fe + 3O2 2Fe2 O3 This equation illustrates the use of coefficients to balance chemical equations .
Now count the oxygen atoms .
There are six on each side of the arrow , confirming that the equation is balanced in terms of oxygen as well as iron .
A coefficient is a number placed in front of a chemical symbol or formula that shows how many atoms or molecules of the substance are involved in the reaction .
From the equation for rusting , you can see that four atoms of iron combine with three molecules of oxygen to form two molecules of iron oxide .
In a chemical formula , the elements in a compound are represented by their chemical symbols , and the ratio of different elements is represented by subscripts .
Consider the compound water as an example .
Each water molecule contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom .
Therefore , the chemical formula for water is : H2 O The subscript 2 after the H shows that there are two atoms of hydrogen in the molecule .
When there is just one atom of an element in a molecule , no subscript is used in the chemical formula .
Covalent compounds are compounds in which nonmetals are joined by covalent bonds .
In these compounds , the element that is farther to the left in the periodic table is written first , followed by the element that is farther to the right .
If both elements are in the same group of the periodic table , the one with the higher period number is written first .
Each formula shows the ratio of ions or atoms that make up the compound .
Ionic compounds are compounds in which positive metal ions and negative nonmetal ions are joined by ionic bonds .
In these compounds , the chemical symbol for the positive metal ion is written first , followed by the symbol for the negative nonmetal ion .
In the picture on the right , a reaction causes the iron tool to turn to rust .
This reaction occurs very slowly .
In fact , it might take many years for all of the iron in the tool to turn to rust .
Some chemical bonds break and new chemical bonds form .
Chemical reactions are represented by chemical equations , like the one below , in which reactants -LRB- on the left -RRB- are connected by an arrow to products -LRB- on the right -RRB- .
Reactants Products Chemical reactions may occur quickly or slowly .
Both represent chemical reactions .
In the picture on the left , a reaction inside a fire extinguisher causes foam to shoot out of the extinguisher .
This reaction occurs almost instantly .
The reactants and products in a chemical reaction contain the same atoms , but they are rearranged during the reaction .
This happens because chemical bonds break in the reactants and new chemical bonds form in the products .
The Figure 1.2 represents this reaction .
Bonds break in molecules of hydrogen and oxygen , and then new bonds form in molecules of water .
In both reactants and products there are four hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms , but the atoms are combined differently in water .
All chemical reactions involve energy .
Energy is used to break bonds in reactants , and energy is released when new bonds form in products .
You can tell by the heat and light energy given off by a wood fire .
In exothermic reactions , more energy is released when bonds form in products than is used to break bonds in reactants .
These reactions release energy to the environment , often in the form of heat or light .
In endothermic reactions , more energy is used to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products .
These reactions absorb energy from the environment .
How fast a chemical reaction occurs is called the reaction rate .
Several factors affect the rate of a given chemical reaction .
For example , food spoils because of chemical reactions , and these reactions occur faster at higher temperatures -LRB- see the bread on the left in the Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
This is why we store foods in the refrigerator or freezer -LRB- like the bread on the right in the Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The lower temperature slows the rate of spoilage .
A greater concentration of oxygen in the air makes combustion more rapid if a fire starts burning .
Q : It is dangerous to smoke or use open flames when oxygen is in use .
A : Because of the higher-than-normal concentration of oxygen , the flame of a match , lighter , or cigarette could spread quickly to other materials or even cause an explosion .
Look at the hammer and nails pictured in the Figure 1.3 .
Both are made of iron and will rust when the iron combines with oxygen in the air .
They need another substance called a catalyst .
A catalyst isnt a reactant , so it isnt changed or used up in the reaction .
A compound is a unique substance that forms when two or more elements combine chemically .
Q : Sometimes the same elements combine in different ratios .
How can this happen if a compound always consists of the same elements in the same ratio ?
A : If the same elements combine in different ratios , they form different compounds .
The elements in compounds are held together by chemical bonds .
A chemical bond is a force of attraction between atoms or ions that share or transfer valence electrons .
As you can see in the Figure 1.1 , each water molecule consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen .
Like water , all compounds consist of a fixed ratio of elements .
Both compounds consist of hydrogen and oxygen , but they have different ratios of the two elements .
Carbon Monoxide : Carbon monoxide is produced when matter burns .
Because you cant see or smell carbon monoxide , it must be detected with an alarm .
Both compounds consist of carbon and oxygen , but in different ratios .
Car - bon dioxide contributes to global climate change , but it isnt directly harmful to hu - man health .
There are two basic types of compounds that differ in the nature of the bonds that hold their atoms or ions together .
Ionic compounds exist as a matrix of many ions , called a crystal .
Both types are described below .
URL : Covalent compounds consist of atoms that are held together by covalent bonds .
These bonds form between nonmetals that share valence electrons .
Covalent compounds exist as individual molecules .
Ionic compounds consist of ions that are held together by ionic bonds .
These bonds form when metals transfer electrons to nonmetals .
Visible light is light that has wavelengths that can be detected by the human eye .
As you can see in the Figure 1.1 , light with the longest wavelength appears red , and light with the shortest wavelength appears violet .
Only seven main colors of light are actually represented in the diagram .
A prism , like the one in the Figure 1.2 , can be used to separate visible light into its different colors .
A prism is a pyramid-shaped object made of transparent matter , usually clear glass or plastic .
A : Individual raindrops act as tiny prisms .
Matter that is transparent allows light to pass through it .
A prism transmits light but slows it down .
When light passes from air to the glass of the prism , the change in speed causes the light to change direction and bend .
This makes the beam of light separate into light of different wavelengths .
Q : Look back at the rainbow that opened this article .
An opaque object is one that doesnt let light pass through it .
The different colors of glass transmit The color of light that strikes an object may also affect the color that the object appears .
For example , if only blue light strikes green leaves , the blue light is absorbed and no light is reflected .
Q : What color do you see if an object absorbs all of the light that strikes it ?
A : When all of the light is absorbed , none is reflected , so the object looks black .
Many objects , such as the leaves pictured in the Figure 1.3 , reflect just one or a few wavelengths of visible light and absorb the rest .
The wavelengths that are reflected determine the color that an object appears to the human eye .
For example , the leaves appear green because they reflect green light and absorb light of other wavelengths .
A transparent or translucent material , such as window glass , transmits some or all of the light that strikes it .
This means that the light passes through the material rather than being reflected by it .
Therefore , the wavelength of the transmitted light determines the color that the object appears .
Look at the beautiful stained glass windows in the Figure 1.4 .
These three colors are called the primary colors of light .
Red and green light combine to form yellow light .
Red and blue light combine to form magenta light , and blue and green light combine to form cyan light .
Look at the center of the diagram , where all three primary colors of light combine .
These three colors can be combined in different ratios to produce all other colors , so they are the only colors needed for full-color printing .
A very common pigment is the dark green pigment called chlorophyll , which is found in plants .
Chlorophyll absorbs all but green wavelengths of visible light .
Pigments are also found in many manufactured products .
Q : A color printer needs just three colors of ink to print all of the colors that we can see .
The `` E '' represent the amount of energy .
When matter gets in its way , it slows down .
Table 1.1 gives the speed of light in six common materials .
Material Air Water Glass Vegetable oil Alcohol Diamond Speed of Light -LRB- m/s -RRB- 299 million meters per second 231 million meters per second 200 million meters per second 150 million meters per second 140 million meters per second 125 million meters per second No matter how slow light travels , it still goes really , really fast .
It is hard for us to imagine light taking time to cover a distance .
Imagine now your teacher turns the light off .
The `` c '' represent the speed of light .
The light just covered the same distance you just walked .
Now lets think about light traveling between the Sun and Earth .
Air is made up of matter .
When light travels through matter it slows down .
How do scientists know it slows down ?
When sunlight hits Earths atmosphere it bends just a little .
If sunlight goes through water droplets it bends even more .
The bending of light through droplets of water is why we can see rainbows .
It also explains why the straw in a glass of water appears to be broken .
Light always travels at the same speed through space .
When light passes from one medium -LRB- or type of matter -RRB- to another , it changes speed .
Figure 1.1 shows how refraction occurs .
Notice that the angle of light changes again as it passes from the glass back to the air .
In this case , the speed increases , and the ray of light resumes its initial direction .
For a more detailed explanation of refraction , watch this video : Click image to the left or use the URL below .
If light strikes a new substance at an angle , the light appears to bend .
This is what explains the straw looking broken in the picture above .
So , does light always bend as it travels into a new medium ?
Any angle other than perpendicular the light will bend as it slows down .
The bending of light is called refraction .
A combustion reaction occurs when a substance reacts quickly with oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- .
The reaction typically gives off heat and light as well .
The fuel that burns in a combustion reaction contains compounds called hydrocarbons .
Hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon -LRB- C -RRB- and hydrogen -LRB- H -RRB- .
A : If the flame isnt just blue , the methane isnt getting enough oxygen to burn completely , leaving some of the carbon unburned .
The charcoal pictured in the Figure 1.1 consists of hydrocarbons .
Natural gas is a fuel that is commonly used in home furnaces and gas stoves .
You can see a methane flame in the Figure 1.2 .
The combustion of methane is represented by the equation : CH4 + 2O2 CO2 + 2H2 O The combustion of methane gas heats a pot on a stove .
Some compound machines consist of just two simple machines .
Other compound machines , such as bicycles , consist of many simple machines .
Look at the wheelbarrow in the Figure 1.1 .
Effort is applied to the lever by picking up the handles of the wheelbarrow .
The lever , in turn , applies upward force to the load .
The force is increased by the lever , making the load easier to lift .
Effort is applied to the wheel of the wheelbarrow by pushing it over the ground .
The rolling wheel turns the axle and increases the force , making it easier to push the load .
Then , pushing down on the two levers causes the screw to pull upward , bringing the cork with it .
The levers increase the force and change its direction .
Friction is a force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are touching .
All machines have moving parts and friction , so they have to use some of the work that is applied to them to overcome friction .
When a compound machine consists of many simple machines , friction can become a serious problem , and it may produce a lot of heat .
Lubricants such as oil or grease may be used to coat the moving parts of a machine so they slide over each other more easily .
This is how friction is reduced in a car engine .
The mechanical advantage of a machine is the factor by which it changes the force applied to the machine .
Many machines increase the force applied to them , and this is how they make work easier .
The greater the number of simple machines it contains , the greater its mechanical advantage tends to be .
Q : How do you think the properties of compounds compare with the properties of the elements that form them ?
A : You might expect the properties of a compound to be similar to the properties of the elements that make up the compound .
It forms when two hydrogen atoms combine with one oxygen atom .
Do you put salt on your food ?
As shown in the Figure 1.2 , sodium is a solid that reacts explosively with water , and chlorine is a poisonous gas .
But together in table salt , sodium and chlorine form a harmless unreactive compound that you can safely eat .
Q : The compound sodium chloride is very different from the elements sodium and chlorine that combine to form it .
Compounds like sodium chloride form structures called crystals .
A crystal is a rigid framework of many ions locked together in a repeating pattern .
Sodium and chlorine combine to form sodium chloride , or table salt .
A sodium chloride crystal consists of many sodium ions -LRB- blue -RRB- and chloride ions -LRB- green -RRB- arranged in a rigid framework .
Like the combustion reaction in a furnace , some chemical reactions require less energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products .
These reactions , called exothermic reactions , release energy .
In other chemical reactions , it takes more energy to break bonds in reactants than is released when bonds form in products .
These reactions , called endothermic reactions , absorb energy .
Whether a chemical reaction absorbs or releases energy , there is no overall change in the amount of energy during the reaction .
The products have less stored chemical energy than the reactants .
Note : H represents the change in en - ergy .
A : The excess energy is generally released to the surroundings when the reaction occurs .
In a home heating system , for example , the energy that is released during combustion in the furnace is used to heat the home .
Energy may change form during a chemical reactionfor example , from chemical energy to heat energy when gas burns in a furnacebut the same amount of energy remains after the reaction as before .
Q : If energy cant be destroyed during a chemical reaction , what happens to the energy that is absorbed in an endothermic reaction ?
A : The energy is stored in the bonds of the products as chemical energy .
This is represented by the graph on the left in the Figure 1.1 .
Multiplying this mass by c2 would yield enough energy to power 3,600 homes for a year !
It changed how scientists view energy and matter , which are two of the most basic concepts in all of science .
The equation shows that energy and matter are two forms of the same thing .
This new idea turned science upside down when Einstein introduced it in the early 1900s .
Amazingly , the idea has withstood the test of time as more and more evidence has been gathered to support it .
A : E stands for energy , m stands for mass , and c stands for the speed of light .
Einsteins equation helps scientists understand what happens in nuclear reactions and why they produce so much energy .
When the nucleus of a radioisotope undergoes fission or fusion in a nuclear reaction , it loses a tiny amount of mass .
Are mass and energy not conserved in nuclear reactions ?
Do we need to throw out these laws when it comes to nuclear reactions ?
However , its more correct to say that the sum of mass and energy is always conserved in a nuclear reaction .
A chemical reaction occurs when some substances change chemically to other substances .
In this reaction , methane -LRB- CH4 -RRB- combines with oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- in the air and produces carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- and water vapor -LRB- H2 O -RRB- .
The reaction is represented by the following chemical equation : CH4 + 2O2 CO2 + 2H2 O This equation shows that one molecule of methane combines with two molecules of oxygen to produce one molecule of carbon dioxide and two molecules of water vapor .
This means that the same number of each type of atom must appear on both sides of the arrow .
Count the atoms of each type on both sides of the arrow to find out .
A : Sealing the jar was important so that any gases produced in the reactions were captured and could be measured .
If he hadnt sealed the jar , gases might have escaped detection .
Then his results would have shown that there was less mass after the reactions than before .
In other words , he would not have been able to conclude that mass is conserved in chemical reactions .
URL : Q : Lavoisier carried out his experiments inside a sealed glass jar .
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy by particles moving through a fluid -LRB- either a gas or a liquid -RRB- .
Convection is one of three ways that thermal energy can be transferred -LRB- the other ways are conduction and thermal radiation -RRB- .
Thermal energy is always transferred from matter with a higher temperature to matter with a lower temperature .
The Figure 1.1 shows how convection occurs , using hot water in a pot as an example .
This decreases the density of the particles , so they rise up through the fluid .
With less energy , the particles move more slowly , have fewer collisions , and move closer together .
This increases their density , so they sink back down through the fluid .
The result is a loop of moving particles called a convection current .
Convection currents transfer thermal energy through many fluids , not just hot water in a pot .
For example , convection currents transfer thermal energy through molten rock below Earths surface , through water in the oceans , and through air in the atmosphere .
A : During the day , thermal energy is transferred from the air over the land to the air over the water .
During the night , thermal energy is transferred in the opposite direction .
Convection currents in the atmosphere create winds .
The land heats up and cools off faster than the water because it has lower specific heat .
Therefore , the land gets warmer during the day and cooler at night than the water does .
During the day , warm air rises above the land and cool air from the water moves in to take its place .
During the night , the opposite happens .
Warm air rises above the water and cool air from the land moves out to take its place .
The purpose of any cooling system is to transfer thermal energy in order to keep things cool .
If youve ever noticed how warm the back of a running refrigerator gets , then you know that it releases a lot of thermal energy into the room .
Q : Thermal energy always moves from a warmer area to a cooler area .
A refrigerator must do work to reverse the normal direction of thermal energy flow .
Work involves the use of force to move something , and doing work takes energy .
In a refrigerator , the energy is usually provided by electricity .
A refrigerant is a substance such as FreonTM that has a low boiling point and changes between liquid and gaseous states as it passes through the refrigerator .
As a liquid , the refrigerant absorbs thermal energy from the cool air inside the refrigerator and changes to a gas .
As a gas , it transfers thermal energy to the warm air outside the refrigerator and changes back to a liquid .
Work is done by a refrigerator to move the refrigerant through the different components of the refrigerator .
A covalent bond is the force of attraction that holds together two atoms that share a pair of valence electrons .
This forms a molecule consisting of two or more atoms .
The two atoms that are held together by a covalent bond may be atoms of the same element or different elements .
When atoms of different elements form covalent bonds , a new substance , called a covalent compound , results .
The diagram represents an oxygen molecule , so its not a new compound .
Oxygen normally occurs in diatomic -LRB- two-atom -RRB- molecules .
How many covalent bonds hold the oxygen molecule together ?
A : The two oxygen atoms share two pairs of electrons , so two covalent bonds hold the oxygen molecule together .
A water molecule is modeled in the Figure 1.1 .
Each pair of shared electrons represents one covalent bond , so two covalent bonds hold the water molecule together .
The diagram in the Figure 1.2 shows an example of covalent bonds between two atoms of the same element , in this case two atoms of oxygen .
Look at the oxygen atoms in the Figure 1.2 .
By sharing two pairs of valence electrons , each oxygen atom has a total of eight valence electrons .
This fills its outer energy level , giving it the most stable arrangement of electrons .
The shared electrons are attracted to both oxygen nuclei , and this force of attraction holds the two atoms together in the oxygen molecule .
Carbon also exists in an amorphous , or shapeless , form in substances such as coal and charcoal .
Different forms of the same element are called allotropes .
All three forms exist as crystals rather than molecules .
In a crystal , many atoms are bonded together in a repeating pattern that may contains thousands of atoms .
The arrangement of atoms in the crystal differs for each form of carbon and explains why the different forms have different properties .
URL : Q : How do you think the properties of diamond might differ from the properties of graphite ?
Diamond is a form of carbon in which each carbon atom is covalently bonded to four other carbon atoms .
This forms a strong , rigid , three-dimensional structure -LRB- see Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Diamond is the hardest natural substance , and no other natural substance can scratch it .
This property makes diamonds useful for cutting and grinding tools as well as for rings and other jewelry -LRB- see Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
The carbon atoms are arranged in layers , with strong bonds within each layer but only weak bonds between layers -LRB- see Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
The weak bonds between layers allow the layers to slide over one another , so graphite is relatively soft and slippery .
Q : Why do graphites properties make it useful for pencil leads ?
A fullerene -LRB- also called a Bucky ball -RRB- is a form of carbon in which carbon atoms are arranged in a hollow sphere resembling a soccer ball -LRB- see Figure 1.4 -RRB- .
Each sphere contains 60 carbon atoms , and each carbon atom is bonded to three others by single covalent bonds .
The bonds are relatively weak , so fullerenes can dissolve and form solutions .
Fullerenes were first discovered in 1985 and have been found in soot and meteorites .
Around 1800 , the English chemist John Dalton brought back Democritus ancient idea of the atom .
Based on his research results , he was able to demonstrate that atoms actually do exist , something that Democritus had only guessed .
Dalton did many experiments that provided evidence for the existence of atoms .
For example : He investigated pressure and other properties of gases , from which he inferred that gases must consist of tiny , individual particles that are in constant , random motion .
He researched the properties of compounds , which are substances that consist of more than one element .
He showed that a given compound is always comprised of the same elements in the same whole-number ratio and that different compounds consist of different elements or ratios .
This can happen , Dalton reasoned , only if elements are made of separate , discrete particles that can not be subdivided .
From his research , Dalton developed a theory about atoms .
Daltons atomic theory consists of three basic ideas : All substances are made of atoms .
Atoms consist of several types of smaller particles , including protons , neutrons , and electrons .
Atoms join together to form compounds , and a given compound always consists of the same kinds of atoms in the same proportions .
Daltons atomic theory was accepted by many scientists almost immediately .
However , scientists now know that atoms are not the smallest particles of matter .
Because Dalton thought atoms were the smallest particles of matter , he envisioned them as solid , hard spheres , like billiard -LRB- pool -RRB- balls , so he used wooden balls to model them .
Three of his model atoms are pictured in the Figure and used to model compounds .
Q : When scientists discovered smaller particles inside the atom , they realized that Daltons atomic models were too simple .
How do modern atomic models differ from Daltons models ?
A : Modern atomic models , like the one pictured at the top of this article , usually represent subatomic particles , including electrons , protons , and neutrons .
One source of background radiation is rocks , which may contain small amounts of radioactive elements such as uranium .
Long-term or high-dose exposure to radiation can harm both living and nonliving things .
Radiation knocks electrons out of atoms and changes them to ions .
For example , high levels of radiation can weaken metals by removing electrons .
This is a problem in nuclear power plants and space vehicles because they are exposed to very high levels of radiation .
A : Radiation cant be detected with the senses .
This adds to its danger .
Long-term exposure to radon can cause lung cancer .
A single large dose of radiation can burn the skin and cause radiation sickness .
A Geiger counter , like the one pictured in the Figure 1.1 , contains atoms of a gas that is ionized if it encounters radiation .
When this happens , the gas atoms change to ions that can carry an electric current .
For example , it can be used to determine the ages of ancient rocks and fossils .
Cancer cells take up more of the glucose than normal cells do and give off radiation .
The radiation can be detected with special machines like the one in the Figure 1.2 .
The radiation may also kill cancer cells .
A decomposition reaction occurs when one reactant breaks down into two or more products .
It can be represented by the general equation : AB A + B In this equation , AB represents the reactant that begins the reaction , and A and B represent the products of the reaction .
The arrow shows the direction in which the reaction occurs .
Two more examples of decomposition reactions are described below .
A decomposition reaction takes place when carbonic acid breaks down to produce water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- and carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- .
This occurs when you open a can of soft drink and some of the carbon dioxide fizzes out .
The equation for this reaction is : H2 CO3 H2 O + CO2 Another decomposition reaction occurs when water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- breaks down to produce hydrogen -LRB- H2 -RRB- and oxygen -LRB- O2 -RRB- gases -LRB- see Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
This happens when an electric current passes through the water , as illustrated below .
A : Two hydrogen molecules per oxygen molecule are produced because water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- has a ratio of two hydrogen atoms to one oxygen atom .
Democritus lived in Greece from about 460 to 370 B.C.E.
Democritus wondered , for example , what would happen if you cut a chunk of mattersuch as a piece of cheese into smaller and smaller pieces .
He thought that a point would be reached at which the cheese could not be cut into still smaller pieces .
He called these pieces atomos , which means uncuttable in Greek .
Democritus idea of the atom has been called the best guess in antiquity .
A : Modern ideas agree that all matter is made up of extremely small building blocks called atoms .
A : Although atoms are extremely small , it is now possible to see them with very powerful microscopes .
In addition , atoms arent really indestructible because they can be changed to other forms of matter or energy .
Heres what Democritus thought about the atom : How many times could you cut this piece of cheese in half ?
All matter consists of atoms , which can not be further subdivided into smaller particles .
Atoms are extremely smalltoo small to see .
Atoms are separated from one another by emptiness , or void .
Did you ever notice dust motes moving in still air where a beam of sunlight passes through it ?
But even in solids , atoms are constantly vibrating in place .
This sort of observation gave Democritus the idea that atoms are in constant , random motion .
If this were true , Democritus thought , then atoms must always be bumping into each other .
Eventually , the clumps could grow big enough to be visible matter .
According to this theory , atoms of matter are in constant random motion .
Democritus thought that different kinds of matter vary because of the size , shape , and arrangement of their atoms .
For example , he suggested that sweet substances are made of smooth atoms and bitter substances are made of sharp atoms .
Atoms of solids , in contrast , stick together , so they can not move apart .
Differences in the weight of matter , he argued , could be explained by the closeness of atoms .
Atoms of lighter matter , he thought , were more spread out and separated by more empty space .
Q : Democritus thought that different kinds of atoms make up different types of matter .
A : The modern view is that atoms of different elements differ in their numbers of protons and electrons and this gives them different physical and chemical properties .
Democritus was an important philosopher , but he was less influential than another Greek philosopher named Aristo - tle , who lived about 100 years after Democritus .
Aristotle rejected Democritus idea of the atom .
In fact , Aristotle thought the idea was ridiculous .
Unfortunately , Aristotles opinion was accepted for more than 2000 years , and Democritus idea was more or less forgotten .
However , the idea of the atom was revived around 1800 by the English scientist John Dalton .
Dalton developed an entire theory about the atom , much of which is still accepted today .
The girls in the picture above make up a small samplethere are only four of them .
Especially when samples are very large , its important to be able to summarize their overall characteristics with a few numbers .
Descriptive statistics are measures that show the central tendency , or center , of a sample or the variation in a sample .
The central tendency of a sample can be represented by the mean , median , or mode .
To find the median , rank all the measurements from smallest to largest and then find the measurement that is in the middle .
It is the value that occurs most often .
Variation can be described with a statistic called the range .
Direction can be described in relative terms , such as up , down , in , out , left , right , forward , backward , or sideways .
Direction can also be described with the cardinal directions : north , south , east , or west .
On maps , cardinal directions are indicated with a compass rose .
Look again at the map in the Figure 1.1 .
But if Jordan told a friend how to reach the post office from his house , he couldnt just say go 3 kilometers .
Jordan would have to include direction as well as distance .
He could say , go west for 2 kilometers and then go north for 1 kilometer .
When both distance and direction are considered , motion can be represented by a vector .
If you are representing motion with an arrow , the length of the arrow represents distance , and the way the arrow points represents direction .
Q : How would you draw arrows to represent the distances and directions from the post office to the park on the map in the Figure 1.1 ?
Short distances may be measured in centimeters -LRB- cm -RRB- , and long distances may be measured in kilometers -LRB- km -RRB- .
The map in the Figure 1.1 shows the route from Jordans house to his school .
The Doppler effect is a change in the frequency of sound waves that occurs when the source of the sound waves is moving relative to a stationary listener .
Because the car is racing forward -LRB- to the left -RRB- , the sound waves get bunched up in front of the car and spread out behind it .
The frequency of sound waves , in turn , determines the pitch of the sound .
Sound waves with a higher frequency produce sound with a higher pitch , and sound waves with a lower frequency produce sound with a lower pitch .
As the car approaches listener A , the sound waves get closer together , increasing their frequency .
This listener hears the pitch of the siren get higher .
As the car speeds away from listener B , the sound waves get farther apart , decreasing their frequency .
This listener hears the pitch of the siren get lower .
A : The siren will suddenly get lower in pitch because the sound waves will be much more spread out and have a lower frequency .
Imagine a huge bar magnet passing through Earths axis , as in the Figure 1.1 .
A magnetic pole is the north or south end of a magnet , where the magnet exerts the most force .
Although the needle of a compass always points north , it doesnt point to Earths north geographic pole .
Find the north geographic pole in the Figure 1.2 .
As you can see , it is located at 90 north latitude .
The like poles of two magnets repel each other , and the opposite poles attract .
This naming convention was adopted a long time ago to avoid confusion .
It is a huge region that extends outward from Earth in all directions .
Earth exerts magnetic force over the entire field , but the force is strongest at the poles , where lines of force converge .
A dolly is a machine because it changes a force to make work easier .
In physics , work is defined as the use of force to move an object over a distance .
It is represented by the equation : Work = Force x Distance All machines make work easier , but they dont increase the amount of work that is done .
Thats because a machine must use some of the work put into it to overcome friction .
Friction is the force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are touching .
All machines involve motion , so they all have friction .
How much work is needed to overcome friction in a machine depends on the machines efficiency .
Efficiency is the percent of work put into a machine by the user -LRB- input work -RRB- that becomes work done by the machine -LRB- output work -RRB- .
The output work is always less than the input work because some of the input work is used to overcome friction .
The closer to 100 percent a machines efficiency is , the better it is at reducing friction .
A ramp is a type of simple machine called an inclined plane .
It is easier to push the heavy piece of furniture up the ramp to the truck than to lift it straight up off the ground , but pushing the furniture over the surface of the ramp creates a lot of friction .
Some of the force applied to moving the furniture must be used to overcome the friction with the ramp .
Q : Why would it be more efficient to use a dolly to roll the furniture up the ramp ?
Efficiency can be calculated with the equation : Output work Efficiency = Input work 100 % Consider a machine that puts out 6000 joules of work .
To find the efficiency of the machine , substitute these values into the equation for efficiency : 6000 J 100 % = 75 % 8000 J Q : Rani puts 7500 joules of work into pushing a box up a ramp , but only 6700 joules of work actually go into moving the box .
The rest of the work overcomes friction between the box and the ramp .
In the late 1600s , Isaac Newton introduced his law of gravity , which identifies gravity as a force of attraction between all objects with mass in the universe .
The law also states that the strength of gravity between two objects depends on their mass and distance apart .
For example , according to Newtons law , objects on Earth always fall down , not up .
A : A theory is needed to explain gravity .
In science , a theory is a broad explanation that is supported by a great deal of evidence .
Newtons law of gravity was accepted for more than two centuries .
It can predict the motion of most objects and was even used by NASA to land astronauts on the moon .
However , Newtons law doesnt explain why gravity occurs .
It only describes how gravity seems to affect objects .
Q : Newton expressed his ideas about gravity as a law .
In the early 1900s , Albert Einstein came up with a theory of gravity that actually explains gravity rather than simply describing its effects .
Einstein showed mathematically that gravity is not really a force that of attraction between all objects with mass , as Newton thought .
Instead , Einstein showed that gravity is a result of the warping , or curving , of space and time , which made up the same space-time fabric .
These ideas about space-time and gravity became known as Einsteins theory of general relativity .
Einstein derived his theory using mathematics .
This idea is represented by the Figure 1.1 .
According to Einstein , objects move toward one another because of the curves in space-time , not because they are pulling on each other with a force of attraction .
Einsteins theory is supported by evidence and widely accepted today , although Newtons law is still used for many calculations .
Now imagine placing a lighter ball at the edge of the trampoline .
This apparent attraction to the bowling ball occurs because the trampoline curves downward , not because the two balls are actually attracted to one another by an invisible force called gravity .
Einstein theorized that the sun and other very massive bodies affect space and time around them in a way that is similar to the effect of the bowling ball on the trampoline .
His weight stretches the bungee cord .
As the bungee cord stretches , it exerts elastic force upward against the jumper , which slows his descent and brings him to a momentary stop .
Then the bungee cord springs back to its original shape , and the jumper bounces upward .
As you stretch or compress an elastic material like a bungee cord , it resists the change in shape .
As soon as the stretching or compressing force is released , elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape .
URL : Q : What force stretches the bungee cord after the jumper jumps ?
When does the bungee cord snap back to its original shape ?
Springs like the spring toy pictured in the Figure 1.2 also have elastic force when they are stretched or compressed .
A : Bedsprings provide springy support beneath a mattress .
The spring in a door closer pulls the door shut .
The spring in a retractable ballpoint pen retracts the point of the pen .
The spring in a pogo stick bounces the rider up off the ground .
A few common uses of elastic force are shown in the Figure 1.1 .
Electromagnetic radiation is energy that travels in waves across space as well as through matter .
Most of the electromagnetic radiation on Earth comes from the sun .
Like other waves , electromagnetic waves are characterized by certain wavelengths and wave frequencies .
Wave frequency is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time .
Visible light and infrared light are just a small part of the full range of electromagnetic radiation , which is called the electromagnetic spectrum .
Light includes infrared light , visible light , and ultraviolet light .
Q : What sources of infrared light are shown in the diagram ?
A : The sources in the diagram are people and light bulbs , but all living things and most other objects give off infrared light .
At the top of the diagram , the wavelengths of the waves are given .
The frequencies and energy levels of the waves are shown at the bottom of the diagram .
Electromagnetic waves are waves that consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields .
The transfer of energy by electromagnetic waves is called electromagnetic radiation .
Electromagnetic waves can transfer energy through matter or across empty space .
URL : Q : How do microwaves transfer energy inside a microwave oven ?
A familiar example may help you understand the vibrating electric and magnetic fields that make up electromagnetic waves .
Consider a bar magnet , like the one in the Figure 1.1 .
It is an area of electrical force surrounding a positively or negatively charged particle .
The magnet exerts magnetic force over an area all around it .
This area is called a magnetic field .
Because of the field surrounding a magnet , it can exert force on objects without touching them .
Q : How could you demonstrate that a magnet can exert force on objects without touching them ?
A : You could put small objects containing iron , such as paper clips , near a magnet and show that they move toward the magnet .
A vibrating charged particle causes the electric field surrounding it to vibrate as well .
A vibrating electric field , in turn , creates a vibrating magnetic field .
As you can see in the Figure 1.3 , the electric and magnetic fields that make up an electromagnetic wave are perpendicular -LRB- at right angles -RRB- to each other .
However , unlike a mechanical transverse wave , which can only travel through matter , an electromagnetic transverse wave can travel through empty space .
When waves travel through matter , they lose some energy to the matter as they pass through it .
But when waves travel through space , no energy is lost .
Therefore , electromagnetic waves dont get weaker as they travel .
However , the energy is diluted as it travels farther from its source because it spreads out over an ever-larger area .
When electromagnetic waves strike matter , they may interact with it in the same ways that mechanical waves interact with matter .
Electromagnetic waves may : reflect , or bounce back from a surface ; refract , or bend when entering a new medium ; diffract , or spread out around obstacles .
Electromagnetic waves may also be absorbed by matter and converted to other forms of energy .
When microwaves strike food in a microwave oven , they are absorbed and converted to thermal energy , which heats the food .
Up until about 1920 , scientists accepted Niels Bohrs model of the atom .
In this model , negative electrons circle the positive nucleus at fixed distances from the nucleus , called energy levels .
In the mid-1920s , an Austrian scientist named Erwin Schrdinger thought that the problem with Bohrs model was restricting the electrons to specific orbits .
He wondered if electrons might behave like light , which scientists already knew had properties of both particles and waves .
Schrdinger speculated that electrons might also travel in waves .
However , Schrdinger showed that you can at least determine where an electron is most likely to be .
Schrdinger developed an equation that could be used to calculate the chances of an electron being in any given place around the nucleus .
Based on his calculations , he identified regions around the nucleus where electrons are most likely to be .
As you can see in the Figure 1.2 , orbitals may be shaped like spheres , dumbbells , or rings .
Schrdingers work on orbitals is the basis of the modern model of the atom , which scientists call the quantum mechanical model .
The modern model is also commonly called the electron cloud model .
Thats because each orbital around the nucleus of the atom resembles a fuzzy cloud around the nucleus , like the ones shown in the Figure 1.3 for a helium atom .
Q : In the model pictured in the Figure 1.3 , where are the two helium electrons most likely to be ?
Electrons are one of three main types of particles that make up atoms .
Unlike protons and neutrons , which consist of smaller , simpler particles , electrons are fundamental particles that do not consist of smaller particles .
They are a type of fundamental particles called leptons .
The mass of an electron is only about 1/2000 the mass of a proton or neutron , so electrons contribute virtually nothing to the total mass of an atom .
All atoms have the same number of electrons as protons , so the positive and negative charges cancel out , making atoms electrically neutral .
Unlike protons and neutrons , which are located inside the nucleus at the center of the atom , electrons are found outside the nucleus .
Because opposite electric charges attract each other , negative electrons are attracted to the positive nucleus .
This force of attraction keeps electrons constantly moving through the otherwise empty space around the nucleus .
It shows the electron as a particle orbiting the nucleus , similar to the way that planets orbit the sun .
In reality , its impossible to say what path an electron will follow .
URL : Q : How many electrons can there be in each type of orbital shown above ?
Instead , its only possible to describe the chances of finding an electron in a certain region around the nucleus .
The region where an electron is most likely to be is called an orbital .
Some orbitals , called S orbitals , are shaped like spheres , with the nucleus in the center .
Also pictured in Figure 1.2 is a P orbital .
Thats because these electrons are involved in chemical reactions with other atoms .
Atoms may share or transfer valence electrons .
Shared electrons bind atoms together to form chemical compounds .
Q : If an atom has 12 electrons , how will they be distributed in energy levels ?
Q : Sometimes , an electron jumps from one energy level to another .
A : To change energy levels , an electron must either gain or lose energy .
The diagram also shows the maximum possible number of electrons at each energy level .
Only when a lower energy level is full are electrons added to the next higher energy level .
Electrons at the outermost energy level of an atom are called valence electrons .
A pure substance is called an element .
An element is a pure substance because it can not be separated into any other substances .
Currently , 92 different elements are known to exist in nature , although additional elements have been formed in labs .
All matter consists of one or more of these elements .
For example , the element iron is a solid that is attracted by a magnet and can be made into a magnet , like the compass needle shown in the Figure 1.1 .
This allows carbon to form a huge number of different substances .
The element neon , on the other hand , is a gas that gives off a red glow when electricity flows through it .
The lighted sign in the Figure 1.2 contains neon .
The needle of this compass is made of the element iron .
Thats why helium balloons have to be weighted down so they wont float away .
Q : Living things , like all matter , are made of elements .
For thousands of years , people have wondered about the substances that make up matter .
About 2500 years ago , the Greek philosopher Aristotle argued that all matter is made up of just four elements , which he identified as earth , air , water , and fire .
He thought that different substances vary in their properties because they contain different proportions of these four elements .
Nonetheless , his four elements were accepted until just a few hundred years ago .
Then scientists started discovering many of the elements with which we are familiar today .
Atoms actually consist of smaller particles , including protons and electrons , but these smaller particles are the same for all elements .
Q : Why do you think coal and sugar are so different from one another when carbon is a major component of each A : Coal and sugar differ from one another because they contain different proportions of carbon and other elements .
Both coal and sugar also contain the elements hydrogen and oxygen but in different proportions .
In addition , coal contains the elements nitrogen and sulfur .
Consider carbon as an example .
All carbon atoms are the same whether they are found in a lump of coal or a teaspoon of table sugar -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
On the other hand , carbon atoms are different from the atoms of hydrogen , which are also found in coal and sugar .
In some chemical reactions , called exothermic reactions , more energy is released when new bonds form in the products than is needed to break bonds in the reactants .
In an endothermic reaction , it takes more energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products .
The word endothermic literally means taking in heat .
A constant input of energy , often in the form of heat , is needed to keep an endothermic reaction going .
The energy needed for the reaction to take place comes from the water , which gets colder as the reaction proceeds .
This is illustrated in the Figure 1.1 .
Energy must be constantly added because not enough energy is released when the products form to break more bonds in the reactants .
The drop in temperature may be great enough to cause liquids to freeze .
A : Squeezing the cold pack breaks an inner bag of water , and the water mixes with a chemical inside the pack .
The chemical and water combine in an endothermic reaction .
In photosynthesis , plants make the simple sugar glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- from carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- and water -LRB- H2 O -RRB- .
The reactions of photosynthesis are summed up by this chemical equation : 6 CO2 + 6 H2 O C6 H12 O6 + 6 O2 The energy for photosynthesis comes from light .
As you can see in the Figure 1.2 , plants can get the energy they need for photosynthesis from either sunlight or artificial light .
Energy is defined in science as the ability to move matter or change matter in some other way .
Energy can also be defined as the ability to do work , which means using force to move an object over a distance .
For example , when the boy in the Figure 1.1 uses force to swing the racket , he transfers some of his energy to the racket .
Where does this boy get his energy ?
Because energy is the ability to do work , it is expressed in the same unit that is used for work .
One joule is the amount of energy needed to apply a force of 1 Newton over a distance of 1 meter .
For example , suppose the boy in the Figure 1.1 applies 20 Newtons of force to his tennis racket over a distance of 1 meter .
The energy needed to do this work is 20 N m , or 20 J.
If you think about different sources of energysuch as batteries and the sunyou probably realize that energy can take different forms .
The stored energy is released when we digest food .
To move his racket , the boy needs energy stored in food , which is an example of chemical energy .
Other forms of energy include electrical , thermal , light , and sound energy .
The different forms of energy can also be classified as either kinetic energy or potential energy .
Potential energy is energy that is stored in matter .
It is stored in the chemical bonds that make up food molecules .
Gravity holds planets in place around the Sun .
Gravity keeps the Moon from flying off into space .
Gravity exerts a force on objects that are not even touching .
In fact , gravity can act over very large distances .
However , the force does get weaker the farther apart the objects are .
If you push a ball , it starts to roll .
Meteors and skydivers are pulled down by gravity .
Gravity also keeps the moon orbiting the Earth .
Without gravity , the moon would float away .
Many of these satellites help to connect the world .
They allow you to pick up a phone a call in many parts of the world .
Gravity keeps Earth and the other planets moving around the much more massive Sun .
You know that the Earth is rotating on its axis .
This motion causes our day and night cycle .
The Earth also orbits the Sun .
All this motion may cause you to fly off the Earth !
Gravity keeps us firmly down on the ground .
Gravity also pulls on objects that are in the sky .
`` What goes up must come down . ''
Everyone can overcome gravity .
Think about that the next time you jump into the air .
Eventually , gravity will win the battle .
Some are still traveling away from Earth .
By clicking a link below , you will leave the CK-12 site and open an external site in a new tab .
This page will remain open in the original tab .
Energy levels -LRB- also called electron shells -RRB- are fixed distances from the nucleus of an atom where electrons may be found .
Electrons are tiny , negatively charged particles in an atom that move around the positive nucleus at the center .
Conversely , if electrons jump from a higher to a lower energy level , they give off energy , often in the form of light .
This explains the fireworks pictured above .
When the fireworks explode , electrons gain energy and jump to higher energy levels .
Different atoms have different arrangements of electrons , so they give off light of different colors .
A : Electrons with the most energy would be found in energy level IV .
The model in the Figure 1.1 shows the first four energy levels of an atom .
Electrons in energy level I -LRB- also called energy level K -RRB- have the least amount of energy .
As you go farther from the nucleus , electrons at higher levels have more energy , and their energy increases by a fixed , discrete amount .
Electrons can jump from a lower to the next higher energy level if they absorb this amount of energy .
They have just one electron orbiting the nucleus .
An orbital is a volume of space within an atom where an electron is most likely to be found .
As you can see by the images in the Figure 1.2 , some orbitals are shaped like spheres -LRB- S orbitals -RRB- and some are shaped like dumbbells -LRB- P orbitals -RRB- .
Regardless of its shape , each orbital can hold a maximum of two electrons .
Energy level I has just one orbital , so two electrons will fill this energy level .
Q : Energy level III can hold a maximum of 18 electrons .
Electrons are always added to the lowest energy level first until it has the maximum number of electrons possible .
Then electrons are added to the next higher energy level until that level is full , and so on .
How many electrons can a given energy level hold ?
The maximum numbers of electrons possible for the first four energy levels are shown in the Figure 1.1 .
For example , energy level I can hold a maximum of two electrons , and energy level II can hold a maximum of eight electrons .
The maximum number depends on the number of orbitals at a given energy level .
These electrons are called valence electrons , and they determine many of the properties of an atom .
Fluorine will readily gain one electron and lithium will just as readily give up one electron to become more stable .
In fact , lithium and fluorine will react together as shown in the Figure 1.4 .
An atom is most stable if its outermost energy level contains as many electrons as it can hold .
This energy level can hold only two electrons , so heliums only energy level is full .
This makes helium a very stable element .
Consider the elements fluorine and lithium , modeled in the Figure 1.3 .
It would be more stable if it had one more electron because this would fill its outermost energy level .
Chemical reactions constantly occur inside the cells of living things .
However , under the conditions inside cells , most biochemical reactions would occur too slowly to maintain life .
Enzymes are proteins that are synthesized in the cells that need them , based on instructions encoded in the cells DNA .
Enzymes increase the rate of chemical reactions by reducing the amount of activation energy needed for reactants to start reacting .
One way this can happen is modeled in the Figure 1.1 .
After the product is formed , it is released by the enzyme .
The enzyme is now ready to pick up more reactants and catalyze another reaction .
Each enzyme is highly specific for the particular reaction is catalyzes , so enzymes are very effective .
A reaction that would take many years to occur without its enzyme might occur in a split second with the enzyme .
Q : This model of enzyme action is called the lock-and-key model .
A : The substrates -LRB- reactants -RRB- fit precisely into the active site of the enzyme like a key into a lock .
Being brought together in the enzyme in this way helps the reactants react more easily .
Both are described in the Figure 1.2 .
In some chemical reactions , called endothermic reactions , less energy is released when new bonds form in the products than is needed to break bonds in the reactants .
In an exothermic reaction , it takes less energy to break bonds in the reactants than is released when new bonds form in the products .
Energy , often in the form of heat , is released as an exothermic reaction proceeds .
Many hot water heaters burn a fuel such as natural gas .
The burning fuel causes the water to get hot because combustion is an exothermic reaction .
The general equation for an exothermic reaction is : Reactants Products + Energy If the energy produced in an exothermic reaction is released as heat , it results in a rise in temperature .
Q : You turn on the hot water faucet , and hot water pours out .
How does the water get hot ?
A : A hot water heater increases the temperature of water in most homes .
During a combustion reaction , a substance burns as it combines with oxygen .
The combustion of wood is an exothermic reaction that releases a lot of energy as heat and light .
You can see the light energy the fire is giving off .
A combustion engine is a complex machine that burns fuel to produce thermal energy and then uses the thermal energy to do work .
The burning fuel releases thermal energy , which is used to heat water and change it to steam .
The pressure of the steam moves a piston back and forth inside a cylinder .
The kinetic energy of the moving piston can be used to turn a vehicles wheels , a turbine , or other mechanical device .
The Figure 1.1 explains in greater detail how this type of engine works .
Q : What type of energy does the piston have when it moves back and forth inside the cylinder ?
When this happens , all the magnetic domains line up , and the material becomes a magnet .
Materials that can be magnitized are called ferromagnetic materials .
These regions are called magnetic domains .
However , the material can be magnetized -LRB- made into a magnet -RRB- by placing it in a magnetic field .
If you bring a bar magnet close to pile of paper clips , the paper clips will become temporarily magnetized , as all their magnetic domains line up .
As a result , the paper clips will stick to the magnet and also to each other -LRB- see the Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
If you stroke an iron nail with a bar magnet , the nail will become a permanent -LRB- or at least long-lasting -RRB- magnet .
The nails magnetic domains will remain aligned even after you remove the nail from the magnetic field of the bar magnet .
Q : Even permanent magnets can be demagnetized if they are dropped or heated to high temperatures .
The magnetic domains of magnetite naturally align with Earths axis .
The picture on the left shows a chunk of magnetite attracting small bits of iron .
The magnetite spoon compass shown on the right dates back about 2000 years and comes from China .
The handle of the spoon always points north .
Clearly , the magnetic properties of magnetite have been recognized for thousands of years .
Force is defined as a push or pull acting on an object .
When it comes to the motion of everyday objects , however , the forces of interest include mainly gravity , friction , and applied force .
Applied force is force that a person or thing applies to an object .
A : Gravity , friction , and applied forces all act on Carsons scooter .
Gravity keeps pulling both Carson and the scooter toward the ground .
Friction between the wheels of the scooter and the ground prevent the scooter from sliding but also slow it down .
In addition , Carson applies forces to his scooter to control its speed and direction .
Forces cause all motions .
A Newton is the force needed to cause a mass of 1 kilogram to accelerate at 1 m/s2 , so a Newton equals 1 kg m/s2 .
The Newton was named for the scientist Sir Isaac Newton , who is famous for his laws of motion and gravity .
Force can cause a stationary object to start moving or a moving object to change its speed or direction or both .
A change in the speed or direction of an object is called acceleration .
Look at Carsons brother Colton in the Figure starts the scooter moving in the opposite direction .
How much an object accelerates when a force is applied to it depends not only on the strength of the force but also on the objects mass .
Colton would have to push with more force to start it moving and move it faster .
Q : What units do you think are used to measure force ?
For example , Colton pushes on the ground in the opposite direction that the scooter moves , so thats the direction of the force he is applies .
Force arrows A and B in example 2 in the Figure 1.1 -RRB- could represent these forces .
Like other vectors , a force can be represented with an arrow .
Q : How could you use arrows to represent the forces that start Coltons scooter moving ?
A : Colton pushes against the ground behind him -LRB- to the right in the Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The ground pushes back with equal force to the left , causing the scooter to move in that direction .
Energy , or the ability to cause changes in matter , can exist in many different forms .
Energy can also change from one form to another .
The photo above of the guitar player represents six forms of energy : mechanical , chemical , electrical , light , thermal , and sound energy .
A : The guitarist uses mechanical energy to pluck the strings of the guitar .
He gets the energy he needs to perform from chemical energy in food he ate earlier in the day .
The stage lights use electrical energy , which they change to light energy and thermal energy -LRB- commonly called heat -RRB- .
The guitar produces sound energy when the guitarist plucks the strings .
The different forms of energy are defined and illustrated below .
Electrons flow through wires to create electric current .
Electromagnetic energy is energy that travels through space as electrical and magnetic waves .
The light flooding the stage in the Figure 1.3 is one type of electromagnetic energy .
Other types include radio waves , microwaves , X rays , and gamma rays .
All matter has thermal energy because atoms of all matter are constantly moving .
His sweat is soaking up his shirt because he has so much thermal energy .
Sound energy is a form of mechanical energy that starts with a vibration in matter .
Nuclear energy is energy that is stored in the nuclei of atoms because of the strong forces that hold the nucleus together .
The energy can be released in nuclear power plants by splitting nuclei apart .
Q : The fans at a rock concert also produce or use several forms of energy .
A : The fans see the concert because of electromagnetic energy -LRB- light -RRB- that enters their eyes from the well-lit musicians on stage .
They hear the music because of the sound energy that reaches their ears from the amplifiers .
They use mechanical energy when they clap their hands and jump from their seats in excitement .
Their bodies generate thermal energy , using the chemical energy stored in food they have eaten .
Chemical energy is energy that is stored in the bonds between the atoms of compounds .
If the bonds are broken , the energy is released and can be converted to other forms of energy .
This portable guitar amplifier can run on batteries .
Batteries store chemical energy and change it to electrical energy .
The frequency of sound waves is measured in hertz -LRB- Hz -RRB- , or the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a second .
Other animals can hear even higher-frequency sounds .
Bats , like the one pictured in the Figure 1.2 , can hear sounds with frequencies higher than 100,000 Hz !
Q : Bats use ultrasound to navigate in the dark .
A : Bats send out ultrasound waves , which reflect back from objects ahead of them .
They sense the reflected sound waves and use the information to detect objects they cant see in the dark .
This is how they avoid flying into walls and trees and also how they find flying insects to eat .
Infrasound is too low-pitched for humans to hear .
Ultrasound is too high-pitched for humans to hear .
You may have seen special whistles that dogsbut not peoplecan hear .
The whistles produce sounds with frequencies too high for the human ear to detect .
Other examples of friction are illustrated in the two Figures 1.1 and 1.2 .
Even surfaces that look smooth to the unaided eye make look rough or bumpy when viewed under a microscope .
Look at the metal surfaces in the Figure 1.3 .
The aluminum foil These photos show two ways that friction is useful These photos show two ways that friction can cause problems is so smooth that its shiny .
The rougher surface of the soles of the shoes causes more friction and slows you down .
A : Heavier objects press together with greater force , and this causes greater friction between them .
Q : How is friction reduced between the moving parts inside a car engine ?
A : To reduce friction , oil is added to the engine .
Friction causes the molecules on rubbing surfaces to move faster , so they have more energy .
This gives them a higher temperature , and they feel warmer .
It also lets you light a match as shown in the Figure 1.5 .
On the other hand , heat from friction between moving parts inside a car engine can be a big problem .
Scientists have long wanted to find the most basic building blocks of the universe .
1964 Murray Gell-Mann proposes the existence of quarks , the fundamental particles that make up protons and neutrons .
1964-present Through the research of many scientists , many other fundamental particles -LRB- except gravitons -RRB- are shown to exist .
For almost 100 years after Dalton discovered atoms , they were accepted as the fundamental particles of matter .
But starting in the late 1890s with the discovery of electrons , particles smaller and simpler than atoms were identified .
Within a few decades , protons and neutrons were also discovered .
The quest for fundamental particles began thousands of years ago .
Scientists thought they had finally found them when John Dalton discovered the atom in 1803 -LRB- see the timeline in Table 1.1 -RRB- .
The word atom means indivisible , and Dalton thought that the atom could not be divided into smaller , simpler particles .
Year Discovery Year 1803 Discovery John Dalton discovers the atom .
1897 J.J. Thomson discovers the electron , the first lepton to be discovered .
1905 Albert Einstein discovers the photon , the first boson to be discovered .
1911 Ernest Rutherford discovers the proton , the first particle to be discovered in the nucleus of the atom .
Year 1932 Discovery James Chadwick discovers the neutron , another particle in the nucleus .
Today , scientists think that electrons truly are fundamental particles that can not be broken down into smaller , simpler particles .
Quarks also have a different type of charge , called color charge , although it has nothing to do with the colors that we see .
Quarks are never found alone but instead always occur in groups of two or three quarks .
There are also six types of leptons , including electrons .
Each of these bosons carries a different fundamental force between interacting particles .
In addition , there is a particle which may exist , called the `` Higgs Boson '' , which gives objects the masses they have .
Protons and neutrons , on the other hand , are no longer thought to be fundamental particles .
Q : Protons consist of three quarks : two up quarks and one down quark .
Neutrons also consist of three quarks : two down quarks and one up quark .
A : These combinations of quarks give protons a total electric charge of +1 -LRB- 2/3 + 2/3 - 1/3 = 1 -RRB- and neutrons a total electric charge of 0 -LRB- 2/3 - 1/3 - 1/3 = 0 -RRB- .
Instead , they are now thought to consist of smaller , simpler particles of matter called quarks .
Scientists theorize that leptons and quarks are held together by yet another type of fundamental particles called bosons .
All three types of fundamental particlesleptons , quarks , and bosonsare described below .
The following Figure 1.1 shows the variety of particles of each type .
In ordinary matter , virtually all quarks are of the types called up and down quarks .
All of these forces are thought to be transmitted by bosons , the force - carrying fundamental particles .
What evidence do you think leads scientists to think that these hypothetical particles affect both leptons and quarks and that they carry force over all distances ?
A : Gravity is known to affect all matter that has mass , and both quarks and leptons have mass .
Gravity is also known to work over long as well as short distances .
For example , Earths gravity keeps you firmly planted on the ground and also keeps the moon orbiting around the planet .
The different types of bosons and the forces they carry are shown in Table 1.2 .
Consider the examples of gluons , the bosons that carry the strong nuclear force .
A continuous exchange of gluons between quarks binds them together in both protons and neutrons .
Type of Bosons Gluons Fundamental Force They Carry strong nuclear force Particles They Affect quarks Distance over Which They Carry Force only within the nucleus Type of Bosons W bosons Z bosons Photons Gravitons -LRB- hypothetical -RRB- Fundamental Force They Carry weak nuclear force Particles They Affect leptons and quarks Distance over Which They Carry Force only within the nucleus electromagnetic force force of gravity leptons and quarks leptons and quarks all distances all distances Q : Which type of boson carries force between the negative electrons and positive protons of an atom ?
A : Photons carry electromagnetic force .
They are responsible for the force of attraction or repulsion between all electrically charged matter , including the force of attraction between negative electrons and positive protons in an atom .
Q : Gravitons have not yet been discovered so they have only been hypothesized to exist .
Based on their knowledge of subatomic particles , scientists have developed a theory called the standard model to explain all the matter in the universe and how it is held together .
The model includes only the fundamental particles in the Table 1.2 .
According to the model , all known matter consists of quarks and leptons that interact by exchanging bosons , which transmit fundamental forces .
The standard model is a good theory because all of its predictions have been verified by experimental data .
However , the model doesnt explain everything , including the force of gravity and why matter has mass .
Scientists continue to search for evidence that will allow them to explain these aspects of force and matter as well .
Electromagnetic waves are waves of electric and magnetic energy that travel through space at the speed of light .
The energy travels in tiny packets of energy , called photons .
Photons of gamma energy are called gamma particles .
Gamma rays are produced when radioactive elements decay .
This often happens after alpha or beta decay has occurred .
Because only energy is emitted during gamma decay , the number of protons remains the same .
Q : The Figure 1.1 shows how helium-3 -LRB- He-3 -RRB- decays by emitting a gamma particle .
After the nucleus emits the gamma particle , it still has two protons , so the atom is still the same element .
In this process , the nuclei give off energy and may also emit charged particles of matter .
Types of radioactive decay include alpha , beta , and gamma decay .
In alpha and beta decay , both particles and energy are emitted .
Alpha and beta decay occur when a nucleus has too many protons or an unstable ratio of protons to neutrons .
When the nucleus emits a particle , it gains or loses one or two protons , so the atom becomes a different element .
Gamma decay , in contrast , occurs when a nucleus is in an excited state and has too much energy to be stable .
They can travel farther and penetrate materials more deeply than can the charged particles emitted during alpha and beta decay .
Gamma rays can be stopped only by several centimeters of lead or several meters of concrete .
The full range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves , shown in the Figure 1.1 , is called the electromagnetic spectrum .
Gamma rays are given off by radioactive atoms and nuclear explosions .
Fortunately , gamma rays from space are absorbed by Earths atmosphere before they can reach the surface .
Q : Predict how gamma rays might affect living things on Earth if they werent absorbed by the atmosphere .
A : Gamma rays would destroy most living things on Earth because they have so much energy .
The extremely high energy of gamma rays allows them to penetrate just about anything .
This makes gamma rays very dangerous .
In this type of treatment , a medical device sends out focused gamma rays that target cancerous cells .
The gamma rays kill the cells and destroy the cancer .
Gravity can act between objects that are not even touching .
Gravity also keeps Earth and the other planets moving around the much more massive sun .
When you drop a paper clip , why doesnt it fall toward you instead of toward Earth ?
Weight measures the force of gravity pulling downward on an object .
On the moon , which has less gravity , the same mass would weigh less .
Weight is measured with a scale , like the spring scale shown in the Figure 1.1 .
To delve a little deeper into weight and gravity , watch this video : Click image to the left or use the URL below .
At the following URL , read about gravity and tides .
Watch the animation and look closely at the diagrams .
Then answer the questions below .
Groups 13-16 of the periodic table -LRB- orange in the Figure 1.1 -RRB- are the only groups that contain elements classified as metalloids .
Unlike other groups of the periodic table , which contain elements in just one class , groups 13-16 contain elements in at least two different classes .
Groups 13-16 fall between the transition metals -LRB- in groups 3-12 -RRB- and the nonmetals called halogens -LRB- in group 17 -RRB- .
Metalloids are the smallest class of elements , containing just six members : boron -LRB- B -RRB- , silicon -LRB- Si -RRB- , germanium -LRB- Ge -RRB- , arsenic -LRB- As -RRB- , antimony -LRB- Sb -RRB- , and tellurium -LRB- Te -RRB- .
Metalloids have some properties of metals -LRB- elements that can conduct electricity -RRB- and some properties of nonmetals -LRB- elements that can not conduct electricity -RRB- .
For example , most metalloids can conduct electricity , but not as well as metals .
Metalloids also tend to be shiny like metals , but brittle like nonmetals .
Chemically , metalloids may behave like metals or nonmetals , depending on their number of valence electrons .
Q : Why does the chemical behavior of an element depend on its number of valence electrons ?
A : Valence electrons are the electrons in an atoms outer energy level that may be involved in chemical reactions with other atoms .
Group 13 of the periodic table is also called the boron group because boron -LRB- B -RRB- is the first element at the top of the group -LRB- see Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
Group 14 of the periodic table is headed by the nonmetal carbon -LRB- C -RRB- , so this group is also called the carbon group .
Carbon is followed by silicon -LRB- Si -RRB- and germanium -LRB- Ge -RRB- -LRB- Figure 1.3 -RRB- , which are metalloids , and then by tin -LRB- Sn -RRB- and lead -LRB- Pb -RRB- , which are metals .
Group 15 of the periodic table is also called the nitrogen group .
The first element in the group is the nonmetal nitrogen -LRB- N -RRB- , followed by phosphorus -LRB- P -RRB- , another nonmetal .
Along with silicon , it is used to make the tiny electric cir - cuits on computer chips .
It is also used to make fiber optic cableslike the one pictured herethat carry telephone and other communication signals .
Nitrogen , for example , is not very reactive at all , whereas phosphorus is very reactive and found naturally only in combination with other substances .
Group 16 of the periodic table is also called the oxygen group .
A : Group 2 elements , called the alkaline Earth metals , form compounds with elements in the oxygen group .
Thats because group 2 elements have two valence electrons that they are eager to give up .
Q : With six valence electrons , group 16 elements need to attract two electrons from another element to have a stable electron arrangement of eight valence electrons .
Arsenic is extremely toxic , so it is used as rat poison .
As you can see in the periodic table 1.1 , the halogens include the elements fluorine -LRB- F -RRB- , chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- , bromine -LRB- Br -RRB- , iodine -LRB- I -RRB- , and astatine -LRB- At -RRB- .
Astatine is radioactive and rapidly decays to other , more stable elements .
A : The number of valence electrons starts at one for elements in group 1 .
It then increases by one from left to right across each period -LRB- row -RRB- of the periodic table for groups 1-2 and 13-18 -LRB- numbered 3-0 in the periodic table above . -RRB-
Because all halogens have seven valence electrons , they are eager to gain one more electron .
Halogens often combine with alkali metals in group 1 of the periodic table .
Alkali metals have just one valence electron , which they are equally eager to donate .
Reactions involving halogens , especially halogens near the top of the group , may be explosive .
-LRB- Warning : Dont try any of these reactions at home ! -RRB-
Halogens also vary in color , as you can see in the Figure 1.2 .
Like other nonmetals , halogens can not conduct electricity or heat .
Compared with most other elements , halogens have relatively low melting and boiling points .
A few are described in the Figure 1.3 .
A : The ability of halogens to kill germs and bleach clothes relates to their highly reactive nature .
Sound is a form of energy that travels in waves through matter .
The ability to sense sound energy and perceive sound is called hearing .
The electrical signals travel to the brain , which interprets them as the sounds we hear .
The Figure 1.1 shows the three main parts of the ear : the outer , middle , and inner ear .
The ear canal is a tube that carries sound waves into the ear .
It is a thin membrane stretched tight across the end of the ear canal .
Q : How might cupping his hands behind his ears help the boy pictured in the opening image hear better ?
A : His hands might help the pinna of his ears catch sound waves and direct them into the ear canal .
If you look at these bones in the Figure 1.1 , you might notice that they resemble the objects for which they are named .
Why would amplifying the sound waves as they pass through the middle ear improve hearing ?
This increases the intensity and loudness of the sounds , so they are easier to hear .
The stirrup in the middle ear passes the amplified sound waves to the inner ear through the oval window .
Each hair cell has many tiny hairs , as you can see in the magnified image 1.2 .
When the cochlea vibrates , it causes waves in the fluid inside .
The waves bend the hairs on the hair cells , and this triggers electrical impulses .
All of the structures of the ear that are involved in hearing must work well for a person to have normal hearing .
Damage to any of the structures , through illness or injury , may cause hearing loss .
Total hearing loss is called deafness .
Loud sounds can damage hair cells inside the ears .
Hair cells change sound waves to electrical signals that the brain can interpret as sounds .
Louder sounds , which have greater intensity than softer sounds , can damage hair cells more quickly than softer sounds .
The intensity of sounds is measured in decibels -LRB- dB -RRB- .
Examples include construction workers who work around loud machinery for many hours each day .
Many home and yard chores and even recreational activities are loud enough to cause hearing loss if people are exposed to them for too much time .
Thermal energy is the kinetic energy of moving particles of matter , measured by their temperature .
Thermal energy always moves from matter with greater thermal energy to matter with less thermal energy , so it moves from warmer to cooler substances .
Thermal energy is transferred in this way until both substances have the same thermal energy and temperature .
Q : How is thermal energy transferred in an oven ?
A : Thermal energy of the hot oven is transferred to the cooler food , raising its temperature .
You might think that the ice cools down the cola , but in fact , it works the other way around .
The warm cola heats up the ice .
Thermal energy from the warm cola is transferred to the much colder ice , causing it to melt .
The cola loses thermal energy in the process , so its temperature falls .
Thermal energy is the total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter , and the transfer of thermal energy is called heat .
Conduction is one of three ways that thermal energy can be transferred -LRB- the other ways are convection and thermal radiation -RRB- .
To understand how conduction works , you need to think about the tiny particles that make up matter .
The particles of all matter are in constant random motion , but the particles of warmer matter have more energy and move more quickly than the particles of cooler matter .
When particles of warmer matter collide with particles of cooler matter , they transfer some of their thermal energy to the cooler particles .
In the opening photo above , conduction occurs between particles of metal in the cookie sheet and anything cooler that comes into contact with ithopefully , not someones bare hands !
The cookie sheet in the opening image transfers thermal energy to the cookies and helps them bake .
The Figure 1.1 shows a few situations in which thermal energy is transferred in this way .
Q : How is thermal energy transferred in each of the situations pictured in the Figure 1.1 ?
A : Thermal energy is transferred by conduction from the hot iron to the shirt , from the hot cup to the hand holding it , from the flame of the camp stove to the bottom of the pot as well as from the bottom of the pot to the food inside , and from the feet to the snow .
The shirt , hand , pot , food , and snow become warmer because of the transferred energy .
Because the feet lose thermal energy , they feel colder .
The transfer of thermal energy is called heat .
Regardless of the type of heating system in a home , the basic function is the same : to produce thermal energy and transfer it to air throughout the house .
A hot-water heating system produces thermal energy to heat water and then pumps the hot water throughout the building in a system of pipes and radiators .
Q : Look closely at the hot-water heating system in the Figure 1.1 .
What happens to the water as it flows through the radiator ?
Why is each radiator connected to two pipes ?
A : The radiator is where most of the energy transfer occurs .
Water passes through such a great length of pipe in the radiator that it transfers a lot of thermal energy to the radiator .
The cool water flows into a return pipe rather than going directly to another radiator because the cool water no longer has enough thermal energy to heat a room .
Water is heated in a boiler that burns a fuel such as natural gas or heating oil .
The boiler converts the chemical energy stored in the fuel to thermal energy .
The heated water is pumped from the boiler through pipes and radiators throughout the house .
The radiators get warm when the hot water flows through them .
The warm radiators radiate thermal energy to the air around them .
The warm air then circulates throughout the rooms in convection currents .
A warm-air heating system uses thermal energy to heat air and then forces the warm air through a system of ducts and registers .
The air is heated in a furnace that burns fuel such as natural gas , propane , or heating oil .
After the air gets warm , a fan blows it through the ducts and out through the registers that are located in each room .
Warm air blowing out of a register moves across the room , pushing cold air out of the way .
The cold air enters a return register across the room and returns to the furnace with the help of another fan .
Q : How does a home heating system know when to run and when to stop running ?
A : A home heating system is turned on or off by a thermostat .
A thermostat , like the one seen in the Figure 1.3 , is an important part of any home heating system .
The thermostat is set at a selected temperature , say 71 F . When the temperature in the home starts to fall below this point , the thermostat triggers the boiler or furnace to start running .
When the temperature starts to rise above this point , the thermostat triggers the boiler or furnace to stop running .
In this way , the thermostat maintains the homes temperature at the set point .
Hydrocarbons are the simplest type of carbon-based compounds , but they can vary greatly in size .
Q : How are hydrocarbons involved in each of the photos pictured above ?
The lawn mower runs on a mixture of hydrocarbons called gasoline , and the camp stove burns a hydrocarbon fuel named isobutane .
The size of hydrocarbon molecules influences their properties , including their melting and boiling points .
Hydrocarbons are generally nonpolar , which means that their molecules do not have oppositely charged sides .
In fact , hydrocarbons tend to repel water .
Hydrocarbons are placed in two different classes : saturated hydrocarbons and unsaturated hydrocarbons .
Saturated hydrocarbons have only single bonds between carbon atoms , so the carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible .
Unsaturated hydrocarbons have at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms , so the carbon atoms are not bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible .
Candle : Many candles are made of paraffin wax , a solid mixture of hydrocarbons .
Lighter : This lighter burns the hydrocarbon named butane .
Rain Boots : These rain boots are made of a mixture of several hydro - carbons .
Transportation : These forms of transportation are fueled by different mixtures of hydrocarbons .
Several other ways are pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Hydrocarbons are also used to make things , including plastics and synthetic fabrics such as polyester .
Motor oil : Motor oil consists of several hydrocarbons .
Asphalt : Asphalt pavement on highways is made of hy - drocarbons found in petroleum .
Fossil fuels formed over hundreds of millions of years , as dead organisms were covered with sediments and put under great pressure .
The Figure 1.2 shows one way that coal deposits are mined .
This group -LRB- column -RRB- of the table is shown in Figure below .
Doing so allows them to achieve a full outer energy level and maximum stability .
It includes the nonmetal hydrogen -LRB- H -RRB- and six metals that are called alkali metals .
These are the electrons in their outer energy level that can be involved in chemical reactions .
Valence electrons determine many of the properties of an element , so elements in the same group have similar properties .
This makes them very reactive .
Q : Why does having just one valence electron make group 1 elements very reactive ?
A : With just one valence electron , group 1 elements are eager to lose that electron .
Because alkali metals are so reactive , they are found in nature only in combination with other elements .
They often combine with group 17 elements , which are very eager to gain an electron .
Besides being very reactive , alkali metals share a number of other properties .
Alkali metals are low in density , and some of them float on water .
Some are even soft enough to cut with a knife , like the sodium pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Although all group 1 elements share certain properties , such as being very reactive , they are not alike in every way .
Three different group 1 elements are described in more detail below .
Its one valence electron is far removed from the nucleus , as you can see in the atomic model on the right , so it is easily removed from the atom .
Francium is radioactive and quickly decays to form other elements such as radium .
Q : Francium decays too quickly to form compounds with other elements .
A : With one valence electron , francium would bond with a halogen element in group 17 , which has seven valence electrons and needs one more to fill its outer energy level .
Elements in group 17 include fluorine and chlorine .
When two hydrogen atoms bond together , they share a pair of electrons .
The shared electrons fill their only energy level , giving them the most stable arrangement of electrons .
Potassium is a soft , silvery metal that ignites explosively in water .
It easily loses its one valence electron to form positive potassium ions -LRB- K + -RRB- , which are needed by all living cells .
Potassium is so impor - tant for plants that it is found in almost all fertilizers , like the one shown here .
All polar compounds contain polar bonds -LRB- although not all compounds that contain polar bonds are polar . -RRB-
In a polar bond , two atoms share electrons unequally .
One atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly , so it has a partial negative charge .
The other atom attracts the shared electrons less strongly , so it is has a partial positive charge .
In a water molecule , the oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons more strongly than the hydrogen atoms do .
This explains why the oxygen side of the water molecule has a partial negative charge and the hydrogen side of the molecule has a partial positive charge .
Q : If a molecule is polar , how might this affect its interactions with nearby molecules of the same compound ?
Changes of state from solid to liquid and from liquid to gas occur when matter gains energy .
The energy allows individual molecules to separate and move apart from one another .
It takes more energy to bring about these changes of state for polar molecules .
Although hydrogen bonds are weak , they add to the energy needed for molecules to move apart from one another , so it takes higher temperatures for these changes of state to occur in polar compounds .
This explains why polar compounds have relatively high melting and boiling points .
The Table 1.1 compares melting and boiling points for some polar and nonpolar covalent compounds .
An inclined plane is a simple machine that consists of a sloping surface connecting a lower elevation to a higher elevation .
Inclined planes make it easier to move objects to a higher elevation .
The sloping surface of the inclined plane supports part of the weight of the object as it moves up the slope .
As a result , it takes less force to move the object uphill .
The trade-off is that the object must be moved over a greater distance than if it were moved straight up to the higher elevation .
It is the ratio of output force -LRB- the force put out by the machined -RRB- to input force -LRB- the force put into the machine -RRB- .
For an inclined plane , less force is put into moving an object up the slope than if the object were lifted straight up , so the mechanical advantage is greater than 1 .
Q : Which inclined plane pictured in the Figure 1.2 has a greater mechanical advantage ?
Less force is needed to move objects up the gentler slope , yet the objects attain the same elevation as they would if more force were used to push them up the steeper slope .
Inertia is the tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion .
Inertia explains Newtons first law of motion , which states that an object at rest will remain at rest and an object in motion will stay in motion unless it is acted on by an unbalanced force .
Thats why Newtons first law of motion is sometimes called the law of inertia .
For example , think about what happens when you are riding in a car that stops suddenly .
Your body moves forward on the seat and strains against the seat belt .
Why does this happen ?
A : The brakes stop the car but not your body , so your body keeps moving forward because of inertia .
It would be easier for Lauren to push just one of her cousins on her skateboard than both of them .
With just one twin , there would be only about half as much mass on the skateboard , so there would be less inertia to overcome .
The unbalanced force that starts Laurens cousins rolling along on the skateboard is applied by Lauren when she gives it a push .
The force of friction opposes the motion of the rolling skateboard and would eventually bring it to a stop without any help from Lauren .
Friction opposes the motion of all moving objects , solike the skateboardall moving objects eventually stop moving even if no other forces oppose their motion .
Later that day , Jonathan rode his skateboard and did some jumps .
When hes in the air , there is no rolling friction between his wheels and the ground , but another unbalanced force is acting on the skateboard and changing its motion .
Q : What force is acting on the skateboard when it is in the air above the ground ?
And how will this force change the skateboards motion ?
A : The force of gravity is acting on the skateboard .
Once its on the ground , friction will slow its motion .
Once an object starts moving , inertia keeps it moving without any additional force being applied .
In fact , it wont stop moving unless another unbalanced force opposes its motion .
For example , Lauren can stop the rolling skateboard by moving to the other end and pushing in the opposite direction .
A : The inertia of the moving skateboard would keep it rolling forever if no other unbalanced force opposed its motion .
However , another unbalanced force does act on the skateboard Q : What other force is acting on the skateboard ?
A : The other force is rolling friction between the skateboards wheels and the ground .
The loudness of sound is determined , in turn , by the intensity of the sound waves .
Intensity results from two factors : the amplitude of the sound waves and how far they have traveled from the source of the sound .
Q : Why can low-amplitude sounds like whispers be heard only over short distances ?
A : The sound waves already have so little energy that spreading them out over a wider area quickly reduces their intensity below the level of hearing .
It depends on the amount of energy that started the waves .
Greater amplitude waves have more energy and greater intensity , so they sound louder .
As sound waves travel farther from their source , the more spread out their energy becomes .
As distance from the sound source increases , the area covered by the sound waves increases .
The same amount of energy is spread over a greater area , so the intensity and loudness of the sound is less .
This explains why even loud sounds fade away as you move farther from the source .
In a car , the engine does the work of providing kinetic energy that turns the wheels .
This type of engine is found not only in cars but in most other motor vehicles as well .
A spark from a spark plug ignites the fuel-air mixture , causing it to burn explosively within the confined space of the closed cylinder .
The pressure of the hot gases from combustion pushes the piston downward .
The piston moves up again , pushing exhaust gases out of the cylinder through another valve .
The piston moves downward again , and the cycle repeats .
Q : The internal combustion engine converts thermal energy to another form of energy .
A : The engine converts thermal energy to kinetic energy , or the energy of a moving objectin this case , the moving piston .
The engine works in a series of steps , which keep repeating .
A mixture of fuel and air is pulled-into a cylinder through a valve , which then closes .
A piston inside the cylinder moves upward , compressing the fuel-air mixture in the closed cylinder .
In a car , the piston in the engine is connected by the piston rod to the crankshaft .
The crankshaft , in turn , is connected to the driveshaft .
The rotating driveshaft turns the wheels of the car .
The measurement system used by most scientists and engineers is the International System of Units , or SI .
There are a total of seven basic SI units , including units for length -LRB- meter -RRB- and mass -LRB- kilogram -RRB- .
SI units are easy to use because they are based on the number 10 .
Basic units are multiplied or divided by powers of ten to arrive at bigger or smaller units .
Prefixes are added to the names of the units to indicate the powers of ten , as shown in the Table 1.1 .
In the Table 1.2 , two basic SI units are compared with their English system equivalents .
You can use the information in the table to convert SI units to English units or vice versa .
For example , from the table you know that 1 meter equals 39.37 inches .
3 m = 3 -LRB- 39.37 in -RRB- = 118.11 in Measure Length Mass SI Unit meter -LRB- m -RRB- kilogram -LRB- kg -RRB- English Unit Equivalent 1 m = 39.37 in 1 kg = 2.20 lb Q : Rod needs to buy a meter of wire for a science experiment , but the wire is sold only by the yard .
A : Rod needs 39.37 inches -LRB- a meter -RRB- of wire , but a yard is only 36 inches , so if he buys a yard of wire he wont have enough .
Negative ions are named by adding the suffix - ide to the first part of the element name .
Opposite electric charges attract each other , so sodium and chloride ions cling together in a strong ionic bond .
-LRB- Brackets separate the ions in the diagram to show that the ions in the compound do not actually share electrons . -RRB-
When ionic bonds hold ions together , they form an ionic compound .
The compound formed from sodium and chloride ions is named sodium chloride .
In row 1 of the Figure 1.1 , an atom of sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- donates an electron to an atom of chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- .
Thats because metals want to give up electrons , and nonmetals want to gain electrons .
Find sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- in the Figure 1.2 .
If sodium loses that one electron , it will have a full outer energy level , which is the most stable arrangement of electrons .
Now find fluorine -LRB- F -RRB- in the periodic table Figure gains one electron , it will also have a full outer energy level and the most stable arrangement of electrons .
Q : Predict what other elements might form ionic bonds .
It takes energy to remove valence electrons from an atom because the force of attraction between the negative electrons and the positive nucleus must be overcome .
Less energy is needed to remove just one or a few valence electrons than many .
Q : What do you think happens when an atom gains an electron and becomes a negative ion ?
A : Energy is released when an atom gains an electron .
All compounds form when atoms of different elements share or transfer electrons .
Compounds in which electrons are transferred from one atom to another are called ionic compounds .
A : If calcium chloride dissolves in water , it breaks down into its ions -LRB- Ca2 + and Cl -RRB- .
Pure water freezes at 0 C. With calcium and chloride ions dissolved in it , it wont freeze unless the temperature reaches -29 C or lower .
In this type of compound , electrons actually move between the atoms , rather than being shared between them .
When atoms give up or accept electrons in this way , they become charged particles called ions .
The ions are held together by ionic bonds , which form an ionic compound .
Ionic compounds generally form between elements that are metals and elements that are nonmetals .
For example , the metal calcium -LRB- Ca -RRB- and the nonmetal chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- form the ionic compound calcium chloride -LRB- CaCl2 -RRB- .
Q : Now can you explain why calcium chloride prevents ice from forming on a snowy road ?
Many compounds form molecules , but ionic compounds form crystals instead .
A crystal consists of many alternating positive and negative ions bonded together in a matrix .
Look at the crystal of sodium chloride -LRB- NaCl -RRB- in the Figure bonds .
Ionic compounds are named for their positive and negative ions .
The name of the positive ion always comes first , followed by the name of the negative ion .
For example , positive sodium ions and negative chloride ions form the compound named sodium chloride .
Similarly , positive calcium ions and negative chloride ions form the compound named calcium chloride .
Q : What is the name of the ionic compound that is composed of positive barium ions and negative iodide ions ?
A : The compound is named barium iodide .
The ions can move freely , so they can carry current .
As a result , ionic crystals tend to shatter easily .
Try striking salt crystals with a hammer and youll find that they readily break into smaller pieces .
To appreciate how high they are , consider that the melting and boiling points of water , which is not an ionic compound , are 0 C and 100 C , respectively .
The strong bonds between their oppositely charged ions lock them into place in the crystal .
Therefore , the charged particles can not move freely and carry electric current , which is a flow of charge .
But all that changes when ionic compounds dissolve in water .
Some are shown in the Figure 1.2 .
The human body needs several ions for good health .
The northern lights arent caused by atoms , because atoms are not charged particles .
This explains why atoms are neutral in electric charge .
Q : What would happen to an atoms charge if it were to gain extra electrons ?
A : If an atom were to gain extra electrons , it would have more electrons than protons .
Atoms can not only gain extra electrons .
If atoms lose electrons , they become positive ions , or cations .
If a fluorine atom gains an electron , it becomes a fluoride ion with an electric charge of -1 .
Like fluoride , other negative ions usually have names ending in - ide .
Positive ions , on the other hand , are just given the element name followed by the word ion .
How does its number of electrons compare to its number of protons ?
For example , when a sodium atom loses an electron , it becomes a positive sodium ion .
The charge of an ion is indicated by a plus -LRB- + -RRB- or minus sign -LRB- - -RRB- , which is written to the right of and just above the ions chemical symbol .
For example , the fluoride ion is represented by the symbol F , and the sodium ion is represented by the symbol Na + .
If the charge is greater than one , a number is used to indicate it .
For example , iron -LRB- Fe -RRB- may lose two electrons to form an ion with a charge of plus two .
This ion would be represented by the symbol Fe2 + .
Cations Name of Ion Calcium ion Hydrogen ion Iron -LRB- II -RRB- ion Iron -LRB- III -RRB- ion Chemical Symbol Ca2 + H + Fe2 + Fe3 + Anions Name of Ion Chloride Fluoride Bromide Oxide Chemical Symbol Cl F Br O2 Q : How does the iron -LRB- III -RRB- ion differ from the iron -LRB- II -RRB- ion ?
The process in which an atom becomes an ion is called ionization .
It may occur when atoms are exposed to high levels of radiation .
The radiation may give their outer electrons enough energy to escape from the attraction of the positive nucleus .
However , most ions form when atoms transfer electrons to or from other atoms or molecules .
For example , sodium atoms may transfer electrons to chlorine atoms .
This forms positive sodium ions -LRB- Na + -RRB- and negative chloride ions -LRB- Cl -RRB- .
They usually react with ions of opposite charge to form neutral compounds .
For example , positive sodium ions and negative chloride ions react to form the neutral compound sodium chloride , commonly known as table salt .
This occurs because oppositely charged ions attract each other .
Ions with the same charge , on the other hand , repel each other .
Ions are also deflected by a magnetic field , as you saw in the opening image of the northern lights .
Hydrocarbons are compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen atoms .
The smallest hydrocarbon , methane -LRB- CH4 -RRB- , contains just one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms .
Larger hydrocarbons contain many more .
Although they have the same chemical formula , with the same numbers of carbon and hydrogen atoms , they form different compounds , called isomers .
Isomers are compounds whose properties are different because their atoms are bonded together in different arrangements .
In the Figure 1.1 you can see structural formulas for normal butane -LRB- or n-butane -RRB- and its only isomer , named iso-butane .
Both molecules have four carbon atoms as well as ten hydrogen atoms -LRB- C4 H10 -RRB- , but the atoms are arranged differently in the two compounds .
In n-butane , all four carbon atoms are lined up in a straight chain .
Their structural formulas are shown in the images below .
Look at the carbon atoms in each isomer .
In n-pentane -LRB- see Figure 1.2 -RRB- , the carbon atoms form a straight chain .
As you increase the number of carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon , the number of isomers quickly increases .
Q : Why does the number of carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon determine how many isomers it has ?
Atoms of the same element that differ in their numbers of neutrons are called isotopes .
Three isotopes of hydrogen are modeled in the Figure hydrogen .
What is the mass number of each isotope of hydrogen shown above ?
For most elements other than hydrogen , isotopes are named for their mass number .
A : Carbon atoms with 8 neutrons have an atomic mass of 14 -LRB- 6 protons + 8 neutrons = 14 -RRB- , so this isotope of carbon is named carbon-14 .
Atoms need a certain ratio of neutrons to protons to have a stable nucleus .
Having too many or too few neutrons relative to protons results in an unstable , or radioactive , nucleus that will sooner or later break down to a more stable form .
This process is called radioactive decay .
Many isotopes have radioactive nuclei , and these isotopes are referred to as radioisotopes .
This is why radioactive isotopes are dangerous and why working with them requires special suits for protection .
The isotope of carbon known as carbon-14 is an example of a radioisotope .
In contrast , the carbon isotopes called carbon-12 and carbon-13 are stable .
Kinetic energy is the energy of moving matter .
Things with kinetic energy can do work .
For example , the spinning saw blade in the photo above is doing the work of cutting through a piece of metal .
The amount of kinetic energy in a moving object depends directly on its mass and velocity .
Because his mass is twice as great as Juans , his kinetic energy is twice as great : m2 2 KE = 12 80 kg -LRB- 1 m s -RRB- = 40 kg s2 = 40 N m , or 40 J Q : What is Juans kinetic energy if he speeds up to 2 m/s from 1 m/s ?
A : By doubling his velocity , Juan increases his kinetic energy by a factor of four : m2 2 KE = 12 40 kg -LRB- 2 m s -RRB- = 80 kg s2 = 80 N m , or 80 J
You can calculate the kinetic energy of a moving object with this equation : Kinetic Energy -LRB- KE -RRB- = 12 mass velocity2 This equation shows that an increase in velocity increases kinetic energy more than an increase in mass .
If mass doubles , kinetic energy doubles as well , but if velocity doubles , kinetic energy increases by a factor of four .
Thats because velocity is squared in the equation .
The Figure 1.1 shows Juan running on the beach with his dad .
Substitute these values for mass and velocity into the equation for kinetic energy : m2 2 KE = 12 40 kg -LRB- 1 m s -RRB- = 20 kg s2 = 20 N m , or 20 J Notice that the answer is given in joules -LRB- J -RRB- , or N m , which is the SI unit for energy .
Energy is the ability to cause changes in matter .
For example , your body uses chemical energy when you lift your arm or take a step .
In both cases , energy is used to move matteryou .
Any matter that is moving has energy just because its moving .
Scientists think that the particles of all matter are in constant motion .
The theory that all matter consists of constantly moving particles is called the kinetic theory of matter .
Differences in kinetic energy explain why matter exists in different states .
Particles of matter are attracted to each other , so they tend to pull together .
The particles can slide past one another but not pull apart completely .
This explains why liquids can change shape but have a fixed volume .
If particles have enough kinetic energy to completely overcome the force of attraction between them , matter exists as a gas .
The particles can pull apart and spread out .
This explains why gases have neither a fixed volume nor a fixed shape .
Shaking causes carbon dioxide to come out of the cola solution and change to a gas .
The particles can move apart only if they have enough kinetic energy to overcome this force of attraction .
The gas fizzes out of the bottle and spreads into the surrounding air , showing that its particles have enough kinetic energy to spread apart .
This shows that particles of the liquid have enough kinetic energy to slide over each other but not enough to pull apart completely .
If you do nothing to the solid glass of the cola bottle , it will remain the same size and shape .
Its particles do not have enough energy to move apart or even to slide over each other .
The outcome of the war determines the state of matter .
If particles do not have enough kinetic energy to overcome the force of attraction between them , matter exists as a solid .
The particles are packed closely together and held rigidly in place .
This explains why solids have a fixed volume and a fixed shape .
If particles have enough kinetic energy to partly overcome the force of attraction between them , matter exists as a liquid .
When skater 2 runs into skater 1 , hes going faster than skater 1 so he has more momentum .
Momentum is a property of a moving object that makes it hard to stop .
At the moment of the collision , skater 2 transfers some of his momentum to skater 1 , who shoots forward when skater 2 runs into him .
Whenever an action and reaction such as this occur , momentum is transferred from one object to the other .
However , the combined momentum of the objects remains the same .
The Figure 1.1 shows how momentum is conserved in the two colliding skaters .
Do you think momentum is conserved then ?
A : As in all actions and reactions , momentum is also conserved in a head-on collision .
Reflection is one of several ways that light can interact with matter .
Light reflects off surfaces such as mirrors that do not transmit or absorb light .
When light is reflected from a smooth surface , it may form an image .
An image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflected -LRB- or refracted -RRB- light .
It is focused rays of light that make a copy of an object , like a picture projected on a screen .
If a surface is extremely smooth , as it is in a mirror , then the image formed by reflection is sharp and clear .
This is called regular reflection -LRB- also called specular reflection -RRB- .
Waves of light are represented by arrows called rays .
In diffuse reflection , the rays are reflected in many different directions .
However , if the surface is even slightly rough or bumpy , an image may not form , or if there is an image , it is blurry or fuzzy .
This is called diffuse reflection .
Q : Look at the boats and their images in the Figure 1.1 .
Which one represents regular reflection , and which one represents diffuse reflection ?
A lens refracts , or bends , light and forms an image .
An image is a copy of an objected formed by the refraction -LRB- or reflection -RRB- of visible light .
The more curved the surface of a lens is , the more it refracts the light that passes through it .
The two types of lenses have different shapes , so they bend light and form images in different ways .
You can see the shape of a concave lens in the Figure Note that the image formed by a concave lens is on the same side of the lens as the object .
Your brain tricks you into seeing an image there .
The light rays actually pass through the glass to the other side and spread out in all directions .
A convex lens causes rays of light to converge , or meet , at a point called the focus -LRB- F -RRB- .
Which of the three convex lens diagrams in the Figure 1.2 shows how a hand lens makes an image ?
A : Youve probably looked through a hand lens before .
Therefore , the first diagram must show how a hand lens makes an image .
A lever is a simple machine consisting of a bar that rotates around a fixed point .
The fixed point of a lever is called the fulcrum .
Q : Where is the fulcrum of the hammer when it is used to pull a nail out of a board ?
A : The fulcrum is the point where the head of the hammer rests on the surface of the board .
Like other machines , a lever makes work easier by changing the force applied to the machine or the distance over which the force is applied .
How does a hammer make it easier to pull a nail out of a board ?
First , it changes the direction of the force applied to the hammerthe hand pushes down on the handle while the claw end of the hammer head pulls up .
The hammer also increases the strength of the force that is applied to it .
On the other hand , the hammer decreases the distance over which the force is applied .
The hand pushing down on the handle moves the handle over a distance of several inches , whereas the hammer pulls up on the nail only an inch or two .
Other levers change force or distance in different ways than a hammer removing a nail .
Because all machines must overcome some friction , the ideal mechanical advantage is always somewhat greater than the actual mechanical advantage of the machine as it is used in the real world .
Q : Which class of lever is a hammer when it is used to pry a nail out of a board ?
A : To pry a nail out of a board , the fulcrum is located between the input and output forces .
Therefore , when a hammer is used in this way it is a first class lever .
In other words , the hammer increases the force applied to it , making it easier to pry the nail out of the board .
The input force is the force applied by the user to the lever .
The output force is the force applied by the lever to the object .
Based on the location of input and output forces , there are three basic types of levers , called first-class , second-class , and third-class levers .
Seesaw 1 < 1 > 1 yes yes yes Second class Wheelbarrow > 1 no Third class Hockey stick < 1 no = fulcrum I = input force O = output force The Table 1.1 includes the ideal mechanical advantage of each class of lever .
The mechanical advantage is the factor by which a machine changes the input force .
The ideal mechanical advantage is the increase or decrease in force that would occur if there were no friction to overcome in the use of the machine .
When the input force is applied farther from the fulcrum than the output force is , the output force is greater than the input force , and the ideal mechanical advantage is greater than 1 .
When the input force is applied closer to the fulcrum than the output force is , the output force is less than the input force , and the ideal mechanical advantage is less than 1 .
When the input and output forces are the same distance from the fulcrum , the output force equals the input force , and the ideal mechanical advantage is 1 .
The advantage of a third-class lever is that the output force is applied over a greater distance than the input force .
The output end of the lever must move faster than the input end in order to cover the greater distance .
Q : A broom is a third-class lever when it is used to sweep a floor -LRB- see the Figure 1.1 -RRB- , so the output end of the lever moves faster than the input end .
A : By moving more quickly over the floor , the broom does the work faster .
Electromagnetic waves are waves that carry energy through matter or space as vibrating electric and magnetic fields .
Sunlight contains the complete range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves , which is called the electromagnetic spectrum .
As you can see from the Figure 1.1 , light falls roughly in the middle of the electromagnetic spectrum .
Use the electro - magnetic spectrum in the Figure 1.1 to find out which of the three types of light have the highest frequencies .
The sun gives off infrared light as do flames and living things .
You cant see infrared light waves , but you can feel them as heat .
But infrared cameras and night vision goggles can detect infrared light waves and convert them to visible images .
This light consists of a very narrow range of wavelengths that falls between infrared light and ultraviolet light .
When all of the wavelengths of visible light are combined , as they are in sunlight , visible light appears white .
The term ultraviolet means above violet .
A sunscreen with a higher SPF value protects the skin longer .
Sunscreen must be applied liberally and often to be effective , and no sunscreen is completely waterproof .
A : Ultraviolet light can travel through clouds , so it can harm unprotected skin even on cloudy days .
Vitamin D , in turn , is needed for strong bones and teeth .
Too much exposure to ultraviolet light can cause sunburn and skin cancer .
As the slip , slop , slap slogan suggests , you can protect your skin from ultraviolet light by wearing clothing that covers your skin , applying sunscreen to any exposed areas , and wearing a hat to protect your head from exposure .
The SPF , or sun-protection factor , of sunscreen gives a rough idea of how long it protects the skin from sunburn -LRB- see Figure 1.3 -RRB- .
Lipids are one of four classes of biochemical compounds , which are compounds that make up living things and carry out life processes .
Examples of both types of lipids are pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Living things use lipids to store energy .
Types of lipids include fats and oils .
A : Lipids that are fats include butter and the fats in meats .
Lipids consist only or mainly of carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen .
Both fats and oils are made up of long chains of carbon atoms that are bonded together .
As a result , some carbon atoms are not bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible .
How many hydrogen atoms does each fatty acid molecule contain ?
This is as many hydrogen atoms as can possibly be bonded to carbon atoms in this molecule .
These chains are called fatty acids .
As a result , the carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible .
In other words , the carbon atoms are saturated with hydrogens .
Some lipids contain the element phosphorus as well as carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen .
Two layers of phospholipid molecules make up the cell membranes of living things .
Water is also polar and has electrically charged ends , so it is attracted to the oppositely charged end of a phospholipid molecule .
This end of the phospholipid molecule is described as hydrophilic , which means water loving .
This end of the phospho - lipid molecule repels polar water and is described as hydrophobic , or water hating .
This arrangement of phospholipids allows some substances to pass through the cell membrane while keeping other substances out .
A mechanical wave is a wave that travels through matter , called the medium .
In a longitudinal wave , particles of the medium vibrate in a direction that is parallel to the direction that the wave travels .
The persons hand pushes and pulls on one end of the spring .
The energy of this disturbance passes through the coils of the spring to the other end .
Notice in the Figure 1.1 that the coils of the spring first crowd closer together and then spread farther apart as the wave passes through them .
Places where particles of a medium crowd closer together are called compressions , and places where the particles spread farther apart are called rarefactions .
Earthquakes cause longitudinal waves called P waves .
The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends longitudinal waves through underground rocks in all directions away from the disturbance .
P waves are modeled in the Figure Q : Where are the compressions and rarefactions of the medium in this model of P waves ?
Earths magnetic poles have switched places repeatedly in the past .
As you can see in the Figure 1.1 , each time the switch occurred , Earths magnetic field was reversed .
Scientists dont know for certain why magnetic reversals occur , but there is hard evidence that they have for hundreds of millions of years .
Rock samples from many places on the ocean floor show that the north and south magnetic poles reversed hundreds of times over the last 330 million years .
Magnetic domains are regions in the rocks where all the atoms are lined up and pointing toward Earths north magnetic pole .
The newly hardened rock is gradually pushed away from the ridge in both directions as more magma erupts and newer rock forms .
Q : What do you suppose would happen if you cut the bar magnet pictured in the Figure 1.1 along the line between the north and south poles ?
The force that a magnet exerts on certain materials , including other magnets , is called magnetic force .
The force is exerted over a distance and includes forces of attraction and repulsion .
When two magnets are brought close together , their magnetic fields interact .
The lines of force of north and south poles attract each other whereas those of two north poles repel each other .
A magnet can exert force over a distance because the magnet is surrounded by a magnetic field .
In the Figure 1.2 , you can see the magnetic field surrounding a bar magnet .
You can also see how the magnetic field affects the compasses placed above the magnet .
Mechanical advantage is the ratio of the output force to the input force , so it can be represented by the equation : Actual Mechanical Advantage = Output force Input force Note that this equation represents the actual mechanical advantage of a machine .
The actual mechanical advantage takes into account the amount of the input force that is used to overcome friction .
The equation yields the factor by which the machine changes the input force when the machine is actually used in the real world .
It can be difficult to measure the input and output forces needed to calculate the actual mechanical advantage of a machine .
Generally , an unknown amount of the input force is used to overcome friction .
The distance measurements can then be used to calculate the ideal mechanical advantage .
The ideal mechanical advantage represents the change in input force that would be achieved by the machine if there were no friction to overcome .
The ideal mechanical advantage is always greater than the actual mechanical advantage because all machines have to overcome friction .
Ideal mechanical advantage can be calculated with the equation : Ideal Mechanical Advantage = Input Distance Output Distance
Look at the ramp in the Figure 1.1 .
Therefore , the ideal mechanical advantage of this ramp is : Input distance Ideal Mechanical Advantage = Output distance = 62 m m = 3 An ideal mechanical advantage of 3 means that the ramp ideally -LRB- in the absence of friction -RRB- multiplies the input force by a factor of 3 .
The trade-off is that the input force must be applied over a greater distance than the object is lifted .
Many machinesincluding inclined planes such as rampsincrease the strength of the force put into the machine but decrease the distance over which the force is applied .
Other machines increase the distance over which the force is applied but decrease the strength of the force .
Still other machines change the direction of the force , with or without also increasing its strength or distance .
Which way a machine works determines its mechanical advantage , as shown in the Table 1.1 .
A mechanical wave is a disturbance in matter that transfers energy through the matter .
A source of energy is needed to disturb matter and start a mechanical wave .
Q : Where does the energy come from in the water wave pictured above ?
A : The energy comes from the falling droplets of water , which have kinetic energy because of their motion .
The matter through which the wave travels is called the medium -LRB- plural , media -RRB- .
Q : How do the particles of the medium move when a wave passes through them ?
A : The particles of the medium just vibrate in place .
As they vibrate , they pass the energy of the disturbance to the particles next to them , which pass the energy to the particles next to them , and so on .
Particles of the medium dont actually travel along with the wave .
Only the energy of the wave travels through the medium .
In a transverse wave , particles of the medium vibrate up and down perpendicular to the direction of the wave .
In a longitudinal wave , particles of the medium vibrate back and forth parallel to the direction of the wave .
In a surface wave , particles of the medium vibrate both up and down and back and forth , so they end up moving in a circle .
For many years , scientists looked for a good way to organize the elements .
This became increasingly important as more and more elements were discovered .
It is a good basis for organizing elements because each element has a unique number of protons and atomic mass is an indirect way of organizing elements by number of protons .
An ingenious method of organizing elements was developed in 1869 by a Russian scientist named Dmitri Mendeleev , who is pictured 1.1 .
Mendeleevs method of organizing elements was later revised , but it served as a basis for the method that is still used today .
He was writing a chemistry textbook and wanted to find a way to organize the 63 known elements so it would be easier for students to learn about them .
Mendeleev arranged and rearranged the cards in many different ways , looking for a pattern .
You can see how Mendeleev organized the elements in the Figure 1.2 .
They are spaces that Mendeleev left blank for elements that had not yet been discovered when he created his table .
It helped scientists discover new elements and made sense of those that were already known .
Scientists searched for the missing element , and they found it just a few years later .
Scientists searched for the other missing elements in Mendeleevs table and eventually found all of them .
Metallic bonds are forces of attraction between positive metal ions and the valence electrons that are constantly moving around them -LRB- see the Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The valence electrons include their own and those of other , nearby ions of the same metal .
The valence electrons of metals move freely in this way because metals have relatively low electronegativity , or attraction to electrons .
The positive metal ions form a lattice-like structure held together by all the metallic bonds .
URL : Q : Why do metallic bonds form only in elements that are metals ?
A : Metal atoms readily give up valence electrons and become positive ions whenever they form bonds .
When nonmetals bond together , the atoms share valence electrons and do not become ions .
For example , when oxygen atoms bond together they form oxygen molecules in which two oxygen atoms share two pairs of valence electrons equally , so neither atom becomes charged .
The valence electrons surrounding metal ions are constantly moving .
This makes metals good conductors of electricity .
Therefore , the metal can bend rather than crack when the hammer hits it .
This allows metals to bend without breaking .
Metals are both ductile -LRB- can be shaped into wires -RRB- and malleable -LRB- can be shaped into thin sheets -RRB- .
Q : Look at the metalworker in the Figure 1.2 .
Hes hammering a piece of hot iron in order to shape it .
A : The iron ions can move within the sea of electrons around them .
Metalloids fall between metals and nonmetals in the periodic table .
A : Elements are arranged in the periodic table by their atomic number , which is the number of protons in their atoms .
It is the number of electrons in the outer energy level of atoms that determines most of the properties of elements .
How metalloids behave in chemical interactions with other elements depends mainly on the number of electrons in the outer energy level of their atoms .
Boron , pictured in the Figure 1.1 , is the only metalloid with just three electrons in its outer energy level .
Metalloids with more than four electrons in their outer energy level -LRB- arsenic , antimony , and tellurium -RRB- tend to act like nonmetals by gaining electrons in chemical reactions .
Those with exactly four electrons in their outer energy level -LRB- silicon and germanium -RRB- may act like either metals or nonmetals , depending on the other elements in the reaction .
For example , metals are good conductors of both heat and electricity , whereas nonmetals generally can not conduct heat or electricity .
Other physical properties of metalloids are more variable , including their boiling and melting points , although all metalloids exist as solids at room temperature .
Metalloids that can conduct electricity at higher temperatures are called semiconductors .
Metalloids tend to be shiny like metals but brittle like nonmetals .
Metals are elements that can conduct electricity .
In addition to conducting electricity , many metals have several other shared properties , including those listed below .
This means that they can be pulled into long , thin shapes , like the aluminum electric wires pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Metals tend to be malleable .
This means that they can be formed into thin sheets without breaking .
An example is aluminum foil , also pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Q : The defining characteristic of metals is their ability to conduct electricity .
This explains why all metals except for mercury are solids at room temperature .
Thats why metals such as iron , copper , and aluminum are used for pots and pans .
The mercury pictured above is very shiny .
To understand why metals can conduct electricity , consider the metal lithium as an example .
An atom of lithium is modeled below .
Because lithium -LRB- like most other metals -RRB- easily gives up its extra electron , it is a good conductor of electricity .
This tendency to give up electrons also explains other properties of metals such as lithium .
This energy level can hold only two electrons , so it is full in lithium .
Lithium would need to gain seven electrons to fill its outer energy level and make it stable .
Its far easier for lithium to give up its one electron in energy level 2 , leaving it with a full outer energy level -LRB- now level 1 -RRB- .
Electromagnetic waves carry energy through matter or space as vibrating electric and magnetic fields .
The complete range is called the electromagnetic spectrum .
The waves used in radar guns are microwaves .
Find the microwave in the Figure 1.1 .
Microwaves are often classified as radio waves , but they have higher frequencies than other radio waves .
Thats why microwaves are useful for heating food in microwave ovens .
Cell phone signals are carried through the air as microwaves .
A : Microwaves can be interrupted by buildings and other obstructions , so cell towers must be placed high above the ground to prevent the interruption of cell phone signals .
A cell phone encodes the sounds of the callers voice in microwaves by changing the frequency of the waves .
The encoded microwaves are then sent from the phone through the air to a cell tower .
From the cell tower , the waves travel to a switching center .
The receiver changes the encoded microwaves back to sounds .
Radar stands for radio detection and ranging .
In police radar , a radar gun sends out short bursts of microwaves .
The microwaves reflect back from oncoming vehicles and are detected by a receiver in the radar gun .
The frequency of the reflected waves is used to compute the speed of the vehicles .
Radar is also used for tracking storms , detecting air traffic , and other purposes .
Q : How are reflected microwaves used to determine the speed of oncoming cars -LRB- see Figure 1.3 -RRB- ?
A : As the car approaches the radar gun , the reflected microwaves get bunched up in front of the car .
Therefore , the waves the receiver detects have a higher frequency than they would if they were being reflected from a stationary object .
A mirror is typically made of glass with a shiny metal backing that reflects all the light that strikes it .
When a mirror reflects light , it forms an image .
Of course , reflected rays dont actually go through the mirror to the other side , so a virtual image doesnt really exist .
Q : Look back at the image of the girl pointing at her image in the mirror .
An image is a copy of an object that is formed by reflection or refraction .
The shape of a mirrors surface determines the type of image it forms .
A real image forms in front of a mirror where reflected light rays actually meet .
It is a true image that could be projected on a screen .
The image formed by a plane mirror is also right-side up and life sized .
Look at the girl brushing her teeth in the Figure 1.1 .
She is using her left hand to brush her teeth , but her image -LRB- on the left -RRB- appears to be brushing her teeth with the right hand .
The term mirror image refers to how left and right are reversed in an image compared with the object .
The focal point is the point in front of the mirror where the reflected rays meet .
You can see how concave mirrors form images in the Figure 1.2 .
Concave mirrors are also used in some telescopes .
Q : Convex mirrors are used as side mirrors on cars .
A : Because it gathers light over a wide area , a convex mirror gives the driver a wider view of the area around the vehicle than a plane mirror would .
In the 1860s , a scientist named Dmitri Mendeleev also saw the need to organize the elements .
He created a table in which he arranged all of the elements by increasing atomic mass from left to right across each row .
When he placed eight elements in each row and then started again in the next row , each column of the table contained elements with similar properties .
Thats because the table keeps repeating from row to row , and periodic means repeating .
A periodic table is still used today to organize the elements .
The modern table is based on Mendeleevs table , except the modern table arranges the elements by increasing atomic number instead of atomic mass .
The modern table has more elements than Mendeleevs table because many elements have been discovered since Mendeleevs time .
In the Figure 1.1 , each element is represented by its chemical symbol , which consists of one or two letters .
The first letter of the symbol is always written in upper case , and the second letterif there is oneis always written in lower case .
This number represents the number of protons in each atom of copper .
-LRB- Copper is the element that makes up the coil of wire in photo A of the opening sequence of photos . -RRB-
Notice how the atomic numbers increase from left to right and from top to bottom in the table .
Q : Find the symbol for copper in the Figure 1.1 .
Rows of the modern periodic table are called periods , as they are in Mendeleevs table .
For example , period 1 contains only two elements : hydrogen -LRB- H -RRB- and helium -LRB- He -RRB- .
In contrast , periods 6 and 7 are so long that many of their elements are placed below the main part of the table .
They are represented by temporary three-letter symbols , such as Uub .
The number of each period represents the number of energy levels that have electrons in them for atoms of each element in that period .
Q : Find calcium -LRB- Ca -RRB- in the Figure 1.1 .
However , the modern table has many more groups18 compared with just 8 in Mendeleevs table .
URL : The alkali metal sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- reacting with water .
Compounds that form from two or more nonmetallic elements , such as carbon and hydrogen , are called covalent compounds .
In a covalent compound , atoms of the different elements are held together in molecules by covalent bonds .
These are chemical bonds in which atoms share valence electrons .
The force of attraction between the shared electrons and the positive nuclei of both atoms holds the atoms together in the molecule .
Examples include proteins and carbohy - drates , which are compounds in living things .
To name simple covalent compounds , follow these rules : Start with the name of the element closer to the left side of the periodic table .
Follow this with the name of element closer to the right of the periodic table .
The prefix tri - is added to oxygen to show that there are three atoms of oxygen in each molecule .
In the chemical formula for a covalent compound , the numbers of the different atoms in a molecule are represented by subscripts .
For example , the formula for the compound named carbon dioxide is CO2 .
Use prefixes to represent the numbers of the different atoms in each molecule of the compound .
The most commonly used prefixes are shown in the Table 1.1 .
Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 Prefix mono - -LRB- or none -RRB- di - tri - tetra - penta - hexa - Q : What is the name of the compound that contains three oxygen atoms and two nitrogen atoms ?
A : The compound is named dinitrogen trioxide .
Nitrogen is named first because it is farther to the left in the periodic table than oxygen .
Oxygen is given the - ide suffix because it is the second element named in the compound .
The prefix di - is added to nitrogen to show that there are two atoms of nitrogen in each molecule of the compound .
Because valence electrons are shared in covalent compounds , rather than transferred between atoms as they are in ionic compounds , covalent compounds have very different properties than ionic compounds .
Many covalent compounds , especially those containing carbon and hydrogen , burn easily .
Many covalent compounds do not dissolve in water , whereas most ionic compounds dissolve well in water .
Momentum equals mass times velocity and is represented by the equation : Momentum = Mass Velocity Q : What is Codys momentum as he stands at the top of the ramp ?
A : Cody has no momentum as he stands there because he isnt moving .
However , Cody will gain momentum as he starts moving down the ramp and picks up speed .
Q : Codys older brother Jerod is pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
If Jerod were to travel down the ramp at the same velocity as Cody , who would have greater momentum ?
To calculate momentum with the equation above , mass is measured in -LRB- kg -RRB- , and velocity is measured in meters per second -LRB- m/s -RRB- .
If Cody is traveling at a velocity of 1.1 m/s by the time he reaches the bottom of the ramp , then his momentum is : Momentum = 40 kg 1.1 m/s = 44 kg m/s Note that the SI unit for momentum is kg m/s .
If Jerod goes down the ramp at the same velocity as Cody , what is his momentum at the bottom of the ramp ?
In science , motion is defined as a change in position .
In each case , the position of something is changing .
Q : In each picture in the Figure 1.1 , what is moving and how is its position changing ?
A : The train and all its passengers are speeding straight down a track to the next station .
The geese are flying over their wetland environment .
The meteor is shooting through the atmosphere toward Earth , burning up as it goes .
Theres more to motion than objects simply changing position .
As the bus goes by , it momentarily blocks your view of these objects , and this helps you detect the bus motion .
Assume that the school bus pictured in the Figure 1.2 passes by you as you stand on the sidewalk .
The bus isnt moving relative to them , and if they look at the other children sitting on the bus , they wont appear to be moving either .
If the ride is really smooth , the children may only be able to tell that the bus is moving by looking out the window and seeing you and the trees whizzing by .
In a musical instrument such as a drum , the whole instrument and the air inside it may vibrate when the head of the drum is struck .
This changes the pitch of the sounds , or how high or low the sounds seem to a listener .
You can read in the Figure 1.1 how instruments in each category make sound and change pitch .
A : Other percussion instruments include drums and cymbals .
Other wind instruments include trumpets and flutes .
Other stringed instruments include guitars and harps .
Printers like the one that made the plastic bicycle are a new type of technology .
Manufacturing would no longer require specially designed machines in factories that produce pollution .
Another advantage of using 3-D printers to make products is that no materials are wasted .
This would lower manufacturing costs as well as save natural resources .
Because technology finds solutions to practical problems , new technologies may have major impacts on society , science , and industry .
For example , some people predict that 3-D printing will revolutionize manufacturing .
Q : Making products with 3-D printers has several advantages over making them with machines in factories .
A : Making products with 3-D printers would allow anyone anywhere to make just about anything , provided they have the printer , powder , and computer program .
Just download the design on your computer and print the part on your 3-D printer .
New technologies such as 3-D printers often evolve slowly as new materials , designs , or processes are invented .
In 1983 , the first drivable solar car was created by Hans Tholstrup , a Danish inventor who was influenced by the earlier Sunmobile .
Called the Quiet Achiever , Tholstrups car was driven 4000 km across Australia .
Inspired by his success with the Quiet Achiever , in 1987 Tholstrup launched the first World Solar Chal - lenge .
The race is now held every other year .
Its aerodynamic shape helped it achieve that speed .
In 2008 , the first commercial solar car was introduced .
For several decades , researchers have been working on developing practical solar-powered cars .
Its oversized body protects the driver in case of collision and provides a lot of surface area for solar cells .
A : The solar car could not exist without the solar cell .
This invention provided a way to convert light energy to electricity that could be used to run a device such as a car .
It spurred others , including Hans Tholstrup , to work on solar cars that people could actually drive .
Q : How have the World Solar Challenge races influenced the development of solar cars ?
A : The races have drawn a lot of attention to solar car development .
The challenge of winning a race has also stimulated developers to keep improving the performance of solar cars so they can go faster and farther on solar power alone .
Cars powered by sunlight have at least two important advantages over gas-powered cars .
The timeline in Table Milestone 1954 : First modern solar cell 1955 : First solar car 1983 : First practical solar car 1987 : First World Solar Challenge 2008 : First Commercial solar car The first modern solar cell was invented in 1954 by a team of researchers at Bell Labs in the U.S.
Its tiny electric motor was powered by 12 solar cells on top of the car .
A neutron is one of three main particles that make up the atom .
The nucleus is the small , dense region at the center of an atom where protons are also found .
A model of a carbon atom is shown in the Figure 1.1 .
Unlike protons and electrons , which are electrically charged , neutrons have no charge .
-LRB- An atomic mass unit equals about 1.67 1027 kilograms . -RRB-
The number of neutrons , however , may vary for atoms of the same element .
Its name provides the clue that it has a total of 17 protons and neutrons .
Atoms of an element that differ in their numbers of neutrons are called isotopes .
The nuclei of these isotopes of carbon are shown in the Figure 1.2 .
The isotope called carbon-14 is used to find the ages of fossils .
A : Isotopes of an element are named for their total number of protons and neutrons .
Neutrons consist of fundamental particles known as quarks and gluons .
Each neutron contains three quarks , as shown in the diagram below .
Two of the quarks are called down quarks -LRB- d -RRB- and the third quark is called an up quark -LRB- u -RRB- .
Gluons -LRB- represented by wavy black lines in the diagram -RRB- are fundamental particles that are given off or absorbed by quarks .
They carry the strong nuclear force that holds together quarks in a neutron .
Even if you didnt , you probably know that to start a skateboard rolling over a level surface , you need to push off with one foot against the ground .
Do you know how to stop a skateboard once it starts rolling ?
Look how Ninas friend Laura does it in the Figure the skateboard .
Even if Laura didnt try to stop the skateboard , it would stop sooner or later .
This law was developed by English scientist Isaac Newton around 1700 .
Newtons first law of motion states that an object at rest will remain at rest and an object in motion will stay in motion unless it is acted on by an unbalanced force .
Without an unbalanced force , a moving object will not only keep moving , but its speed and direction will also remain the same .
Newtons first law of motion is often called the law of inertia because inertia is the tendency of an object to resist a change in its motion .
Coreys friend Jerod likes to skate on the flat banks at Newtons Skate Park .
This causes the skateboard to turn in the opposite direction .
Q : How does Nina use Newtons first law to start her skateboard rolling ?
A : The skateboard wont move unless Nina pushes off from the pavement with one foot .
A : Pressing down on just one side of a skateboard creates an unbalanced force .
The unbalanced force causes the skateboard to turn toward the other side .
In the picture , Jerod is pressing down with his heels , so the skateboard turns toward his toes .
The force she applies when she pushes off is stronger than the force of friction that opposes the skateboards motion .
As a result , the force on the skateboard is unbalanced , and the skateboard moves forward .
Q : How does Nina use Newtons first law to stop her skateboard ?
A : Once the skateboard starts moving , it would keep moving at the same speed and in the same direction if not for another unbalanced force .
The force of friction is unbalanced because Nina is no longer pushing with her foot to keep the skateboard moving .
Q : How does Jerod use Newtons first law of motion to change the direction of his skateboard ?
Thats why Newtons law of gravity is called the law of universal gravitation .
Q : Newtons law of universal gravitation had a huge impact on how people thought about the universe .
A : Newtons law was the first scientific law that applied to the entire universe .
For example , because Earth is so massive , it attracts you and your desk more strongly that you and your desk attract each other .
Acceleration occurs whenever an unbalanced force acts on an object .
Two factors affect the acceleration of an object : the net force acting on the object and the objects mass .
Newtons second law of motion describes how force and mass affect acceleration .
The law states that the acceleration of an object equals the net force acting on the object divided by the objects mass .
This can be represented by the equation : Acceleration = or a = Net force Mass F m Q : While Tony races along on his rollerblades , what net force is acting on the skates ?
A : Tony exerts a backward force against the ground , as you can see in the Figure 1.1 , first with one skate and then with the other .
This force pushes him forward .
Although friction partly counters the forward motion of the skates , it is weaker than the force Tony exerts .
A : Tonys greater mass will result in less acceleration for the same amount of force .
For example , doubling the force on the object doubles its acceleration .
The greater the mass of an object , the less it will accelerate when a given force is applied .
Q : Tony has greater mass than the other two boys he is racing -LRB- pictured in the opening image -RRB- .
How will this affect his acceleration around the track ?
Newtons third law of motion explains how Jerod starts his skateboard moving .
This law states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction .
First an action occursJerod pushes against the ground with his foot .
Then a reaction occursJerod moves forward on his skateboard .
Q : If Jerod pushes against the ground with greater force , how will this affect his forward motion ?
Jerod will be pushed forward with more force , and this will make him go faster and farther .
The forces involved in actions and reactions can be represented with arrows .
The way an arrow points shows the direction of the force , and the size of the arrow represents the strength of the force .
Look at the skateboarders in the Figure 1.1 .
In the top row , the arrows represent the forces with which the skateboarders push against each other .
In the bottom row , the arrows represent the forces with which the skateboarders move apart .
This shows that the reaction forces are equal and opposite to the action forces .
The wall or locker applies an equal and opposite force to you .
Balanced forces are equal and opposite forces that act on the same object .
Action-reaction forces are equal and opposite forces that act on different objects , so they dont cancel out .
He applies force with his foot to the ground , whereas the ground applies force to Jerod and the skateboard , causing them to move forward .
Q : Actions and reactions occur all the time .
Can you think of an example in your daily life ?
As you can see in the periodic table below , noble gases include helium -LRB- He -RRB- , neon -LRB- Ne -RRB- , argon -LRB- Ar -RRB- , krypton -LRB- Kr -RRB- , xenon -LRB- Xe -RRB- , and radon -LRB- Rn -RRB- .
Radon , at the bottom of the group , is radioactive , so it constantly decays to other elements .
It then increases by one from left to right across each period -LRB- row -RRB- of the periodic table for groups 1-2 and 13-18 -LRB- numbered 3-0 in the table above -RRB- .
But helium also has a full outer energy level , because its only energy level -LRB- energy level 1 -RRB- can hold a maximum of two electrons .
As a result , noble gases can not become more stable by reacting with other elements and gaining or losing valence electrons .
Therefore , noble gases are rarely involved in chemical reactions and almost never form compounds with other elements .
Because the noble gases are the least reactive of all elements , their eight valence electrons are used as the standard for nonreactivity and to explain how other elements interact .
This is stated as the octet -LRB- group of eight -RRB- rule .
According to this rule , atoms react to form compounds that allow them to have a group of eight valence electrons like the noble gases .
In this reaction , sodium donates an electron and chlorine accepts it , giving each element an octet of valence electrons .
The balloon is filled with the noble gas helium .
Oxygen in the small amount of air remaining inside the light bulb reacted with the metal filament .
This corroded the filament and caused dark deposits on the glass .
Filling a light bulb with argon gas prevents these problems .
Thats why modern light bulbs are filled with argon .
This protects the filament and keeps the glass blub free of deposits .
Noble gases are also used to fill the glass tubes of lighted signs like the one in the Figure 1.4 .
Although noble gases are chemically nonreactive , their electrons can be energized by sending an electric current through them .
When this happens , the electrons jump to a higher energy level .
When the electrons return to their original energy level , they give off energy as light .
The gas is pumped from a tank into a Mylar balloon .
Different noble gases give off light of different colors .
Neon gives off reddish-orange light , like the word Open in the sign below .
Krypton gives off violet light and xenon gives off blue light .
Unlike a balloon filled with air , a balloon filled with helium needs to be weighted down so it wont float away .
Q : Why does a helium balloon float away if its not weighted down ?
As a result , helium is lighter than air , explaining why a helium balloon floats up into the air unless weighted down .
Early incandescent light bulbs , like the one pictured in the Figure 1.3 , didnt last very long .
The filaments quickly burned out .
Although air was pumped out of the bulb , it wasnt a complete vacuum .
Nonmetals are elements that generally do not conduct electricity .
How might this be related to the properties of nonmetals ?
The number of electrons in the outer energy level of an atom determines many of its properties .
As their name suggests , nonmetals generally have properties that are very different from the properties of metals .
Properties of nonmetals include a relatively low boiling point , which explains why many of them are gases at room temperature .
However , some nonmetals are solids at room temperature , including the three pictured above , and one nonmetalbromineis a liquid at room temperature .
Other properties of nonmetals are illustrated and described in the Figure 1.1 .
Reactivity is how likely an element is to react chemically with other elements .
Although neon has just one more electron than fluorine in its outer energy level , that one electron makes a huge difference .
Fluorine needs one more electron to fill its outer energy level in order to have the most stable arrangement of electrons .
Therefore , fluorine readily accepts an electron from any element that is equally eager to give one up , Click image to the left or use the URL below .
These are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that are involved in interactions with other atoms .
Simple atomic models of these two elements are shown in the Figure 1.2 .
Like most other nonmetals , fluorine can not conduct electricity , and its electrons explain this as well .
Elements that readily give up electrons -LRB- the metals -RRB- can carry electric current because their electrons can flow freely .
Elements that gain electrons instead of giving them up can not carry electric current .
Fission of a tiny pellet of radioactive uranium - 235 , like the one pictured in the Figure 1.1 , releases as much energy as burning 1,000 kilograms of coal !
It begins when a uranium nucleus gains a neutron .
This can happen naturally when a free neutron strikes it , or it can occur deliberately when a neutron is crashed into it in a nuclear power plant .
In either case , the nucleus of uranium-235 becomes extremely unstable with the extra neutron .
It can be represented by this nuclear equation : 235 U 92 141 + 1 neutron 92 36 Kr + 56 Ba + 3 neutrons + energy Note that the subscripts of the element symbols represent numbers of protons and the superscripts represent numbers of protons plus neutrons .
The neutrons released when uranium-235 fissions may crash into other uranium nuclei and cause them to fission as well .
This can start a nuclear chain reaction .
However , if a nuclear chain reaction is controlled , it produces energy much more slowly .
The reaction is controlled by inserting rods of nonfissioning material into the fissioning material .
The steam is under pressure and causes a turbine to spin .
This causes air pollution that harms the health of living things .
Therefore , used fuel must be stored securely to protect people and other living things .
The air pollution also causes acid rain and contributes to global warming .
In addition , fossil fuels are nonrenewable resources , so if we keep using them , they will eventually run out .
The main advantage of nuclear energy is that it doesnt release air pollution or cause the other environmental problems associated with the burning of fossil fuels .
On the other other hand , radioactive elements are nonrenewable like fossil fuels and could eventually be used up .
In nuclear fusion , two or more small nuclei combine to form a single , larger nucleus .
In this example , nuclei of two hydrogen isotopes -LRB- tritium and deuterium -RRB- fuse to form a helium nucleus .
It takes place only at extremely high temperatures .
Thats because a great deal of energy is needed to overcome the force of repulsion between the positively charged nuclei .
The suns energy comes from fusion in its core , shown in the Figure 1.2 .
In the core , temperatures reach millions of degrees Kelvin .
URL : The Sun Q : Why doesnt nuclear fusion occur naturally on Earth ?
A : Nuclear fusion doesnt occur naturally on Earth because it requires temperatures far higher than Earth tempera - tures .
Their goal is develop nuclear fusion power plants , where the energy from fusion of hydrogen nuclei can be converted to electricity .
Unfortunately , using energy from nuclear fusion is far from a reality .
In the thermonuclear reactor , radiation from fusion is used to heat water and produce steam .
The steam can then be used to turn a turbine and generate electricity .
Unlike nuclear fission , which involves dangerous radioactive elements , nuclear fusion involves just hydrogen and helium .
Nucleic acids include RNA -LRB- ribonucleic acid -RRB- as well as DNA -LRB- deoxyribonucleic acid -RRB- .
Both types of nucleic acids contain the elements carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , and phosphorus .
Q : Which of the elements in DNA is not identified with any other class of biochemical compounds ?
Phosphorus is the only element that is identified with nucleic acids .
Nucleic acids consist of chains of small molecules called nucleotides , which are held together by covalent bonds .
The structure of a nucleotide is shown in the Figure 1.1 .
Each nucleotide consists of : 1 . a phosphate group , which contains phosphorus and oxygen -LRB- PO4 -RRB- .
A : The steps represent the base pairs .
Hydrogen bonds are relatively weak bonds that form between a positively charged hydrogen atom in one molecule and a negatively charged atom in another molecule .
Hydrogen bonds form only between adenine and thymine , and between guanine and cytosine .
RNA copies and interprets the genetic code in DNA and is also involved in the synthesis of proteins based on the code .
URL : Q : DNA is found only in the nucleus of cells , but proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm of cells , outside of the nucleus .
How do you think the instructions encoded in DNA reach the cytoplasm so they can be used to make proteins ?
A : After RNA copies the instructions in DNA , it carries them from the nucleus to a site of protein synthesis in the cytoplasm , where the instructions are translated into a protein .
Optics is the study of visible light and the ways it can be used to extend human vision and do other tasks .
Knowledge of light was needed for the invention of optical instruments such as microscopes , telescopes , and cameras , in addition to optical fibers .
These instruments use mirrors and lenses to reflect and refract light and form images .
A : An image is a copy of an object created by the reflection or refraction of visible light .
A common type of light microscope is a compound microscope , like the one shown in the Figure lenses .
The microscope let scientists see entire new worlds , leading to many discoveriesespecially in biology and medicinethat could not have been made without it .
Some examples include the discovery of cells and the identification of bacteria and other single-celled organisms .
With the development of more powerful microscopes , viruses were discovered and even atoms finally became visible .
A : The microscope has revealed secrets of the natural world like no other single invention .
The two types are compared in the Figure 1.2 .
They differ in how they collect light , but both use convex lenses to form enlarged images .
A camera is an optical instrument that forms and records an image of an object .
Regardless of how the image is recorded , all cameras form images in the same basic way , as shown in the Figure 1.3 .
The shutter controls the amount of light that actually strikes the film -LRB- or sensor -RRB- .
A laser is a device that produces a very focused beam of visible light of just one wavelength and color .
Waves of laser light are synchronized so the crests and troughs of the waves line up .
The diagram in Figure 1.4 shows why a beam of laser light is so focused compared with ordinary light from a flashlight .
The following Figure 1.5 provides a closer look at the tube where laser light is created .
The photons of light reflect back and forth in the tube off these mirrors .
Besides entertaining a cat , laser light has many other uses .
One use is carrying communication signals in optical fibers .
The CD player was quickly followed by the laser printer .
Some other uses of lasers include bloodless surgery , cutting and welding of metals , guiding missiles , thermometers , laser light shows , and acne treatments .
More than one signal can travel through an optical fiber at the same time , as you can see in the Figure Q : When lasers were invented in 1960 , they were called `` a solution looking for a problem .
Can you name other ways that lasers are used ?
A : The first widespread use of lasers was the supermarket barcode scanner , introduced in 1974 .
The compact disc -LRB- CD -RRB- player was the first laser-equipped device commonly used by consumers , starting in 1982 .
Earth and many other bodiesincluding asteroids , comets , and the other planetsmove around the sun in curved paths called orbits .
Because of the suns relatively strong gravity , Earth and the other bodies constantly fall toward the sun , but they stay far enough away from the sun because of their forward velocity to fall around the sun instead of into it .
The motion of Earth and the other bodies around the sun is called orbital motion .
Orbital motion occurs whenever an object is moving forward and at the same time is pulled by gravity toward another object .
Just as Earth orbits the sun , the moon also orbits Earth .
The moon is affected by Earths gravity more than it is by the gravity of the sun because the moon is much closer to Earth .
So the moon orbits Earth instead of falling down to the surface of the planet .
The Figure 1.2 shows the forces involved in the moons orbital motion around Earth .
In the diagram , v represents the forward velocity of the moon , and a represents the acceleration due to gravity between Earth and the moon .
The line encircling Earth shows the moons actual orbit , which results from the combination of v and a.
Acids are ionic compounds that produce positively charged hydrogen ions -LRB- H + -RRB- when dissolved in water .
Acids taste sour and react with metals .
A : The strength of an acid or a base depends on how much of it breaks down into ions when it dissolves in water .
Bases are ionic compounds that produce negatively charged hydroxide ions -LRB- OH -RRB- when dissolved in water .
Bases taste bitter and do not react with metals .
The acid in a car battery is strong enough to eat through skin .
Examples of bases include those in antacid tablets and drain cleaner .
Bases in antacid tablets are weak enough to take for an upset stomach .
Bases in drain cleaner are strong enough to cause serious burns .
The strength of an acid depends on how many hydrogen ions it produces when it dissolves in water .
For example , sulfuric acid -LRB- H2 SO4 -RRB- , which is found in car batteries , is a strong acid because nearly all of it breaks down into ions when it dissolves in water .
The strength of a base depends on how many hydroxide ions it produces when it dissolves in water .
A stronger base produces more hydroxide ions than a weaker base .
For example , sodium hydroxide -LRB- NaOH -RRB- , a base in drain cleaner , is a strong base because all of it breaks down into ions when it dissolves in water .
The strength of acids and bases is measured on a scale called the pH scale , which is shown in the Figure 1.1 .
By definition , pH represents the acidity , or hydrogen ion -LRB- H + -RRB- concentration , of a solution .
Its important to realize that the pH scale is based on powers of ten .
When rainwater soaks into the ground , it can slowly dissolve rocks , particularly those containing calcium carbonate .
This is how water forms underground caves .
Q : How do you think acid rain might affect buildings and statues made of stone ?
A : Acid rain dissolves and damages stone buildings and statues .
The Figure 1.3 shows a statue that has been damaged by acid rain .
Fish may also need a pH between 6 and 7 .
Certain air pollutants form acids when dissolved in water droplets in the air .
This results in acid fog and acid rain , which may have a pH of 4 or even lower .
The pH chart in the Figure lowers the pH of surface waters such as ponds and lakes .
As a result , the water may become too acidic for fish and other water organisms to survive .
Acid fog and acid rain killed the trees in this forest .
Thats because carbon dioxide -LRB- CO2 -RRB- in the air dissolves in raindrops , producing a weak acid called carbonic acid -LRB- H2 CO3 -RRB- , which has a pH of about 5.5 .
Thats because sunlight provides the energy for photosynthesis .
This is the process in which plants and certain other organisms synthesize glucose -LRB- C6 H12 O6 -RRB- .
Glucose , in turn , is used for energy by the cells of almost all living things .
Photosynthetic organisms such as plants make their own glucose .
Q : How do living things get energy from glucose ?
The organisms pictured in the Figures 1.1 , 1.2 , and 1.3 all use sunlight to make glucose in the process of photo - synthesis .
All of these organisms contain the green pigment chlorophyll , which is needed to capture light energy .
A tremendous amount of photosynthesis takes place in the plants of this lush tropi - cal rainforest .
The motion of an object can be represented by a position-time graph like Graph 1 in the Figure 1.1 .
In this type of graph , the y-axis represents position relative to the starting point , and the x-axis represents time .
A position-time graph shows how far an object has traveled from its starting position at any given time since it started moving .
Q : In the Figure 1.1 , what distance has the object traveled from the starting point by the time 5 seconds have elapsed ?
A : The object has traveled a distance of 50 meters .
In a position-time graph , the velocity of the moving object is represented by the slope , or steepness , of the graph line .
Average velocity equals the change in position -LRB- represented by d -RRB- divided by the corresponding change in time -LRB- represented by t -RRB- : velocity = d t For example , in Graph 2 in the Figure 1.2 , the average velocity between 0 seconds and 5 seconds is : d t 25 m 0 m = 5 s0 s 25 m = 5s = 5 m/s velocity =
The type of energy she has is called potential energy .
Potential energy is energy that is stored in a person or object .
This gives her potential energy .
Potential energy due to the position of an object above Earths surface is called gravitational potential energy .
Like the diver on the diving board , anything that is raised up above Earths surface has the potential to fall because of gravity .
Gravitational potential energy depends on an objects weight and its height above the ground .
It can be calculated with the equation : Gravitational potential energy -LRB- GPE -RRB- = weight height Consider the little girl on the sled , pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
As she sits at the top of the hill , the childs gravitational potential energy is : GPE = 140 N 4 m = 560 N m Notice that the answer is given in Newton meters -LRB- N m -RRB- , which is the SI unit for energy .
A Newton meter is also called a joule -LRB- J -RRB- .
Q : The gymnast on the balance beam pictured in the Figure 1.1 weighs 360 Newtons .
This energy results when an elastic object is stretched or compressed .
Shes holding a small stone against the stretched band .
A : The elastic band will spring back to its original shape .
When that happens , watch out !
Some of the bands elastic potential energy will be transferred to the stone , which will go flying through the air .
A point will be reached when the object cant be stretched or compressed any more .
Then it will forcefully return to its original shape .
Look at the pogo stick in the Figure 1.2 .
Its spring has elastic potential energy when it is pressed down by the boys weight .
Q : The girl in the Figure 1.3 is giving the elastic band of her slingshot potential energy by stretching it .
All of the examples of potential energy described above involve movement or the potential to move .
The form of energy that involves movement is called mechanical energy .
Other forms of energy also involve potential energy , including chemical energy and nuclear energy .
Chemical energy is stored in the bonds between the atoms of compounds .
For example , food and batteries both contain chemical energy .
Nuclear energy is stored in the nuclei of atoms because of the strong forces that hold the nucleus together .
Nuclei of radioactive elements such as uranium are unstable , so they break apart and release the stored energy .
Power can be represented by the equation : Power = Work Time In this equation , work is measured in joules -LRB- J -RRB- and time is measured in seconds -LRB- s -RRB- , so power is expressed in joules per second -LRB- J/s -RRB- .
For example , compared with a low-power microwave oven , a high-power microwave oven can cook more food in the same time or the same amount of food in less time .
Light bulbs and small appliances such as microwave ovens are labeled with the watts of power they provide .
Q : Assume you have two light bulbs of the same type , such as two compact fluorescent light bulbs like the one pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
If one light bulb is a 25-watt bulb and the other is a 60-watt bulb , which bulb produces brighter light ?
A : The 60-watt bulb is more powerful , so it produces brighter light .
Power can be calculated using the formula above if the amount of work and time are known .
A : The power of the other microwave oven is : J Power = 5000 5 s = 1000 J/s , or 1000 W Q : Which microwave oven will heat the same amount of food in less time ?
A : The 1000-watt microwave oven has more power , so it will heat the same amount of food in less time .
First express 1000 watts in J/s and then substitute this value for power the work equation : Work = 1000 J/s 20 s = 20,000 J
For example , the power of car engines is usually expressed in horsepowers .
This team of three horses provides 3 horsepowers of power .
This big tractor provides 180 horsepowers of power .
Q : If the team of horses and the tractor do the same amount of work plowing a field , which will get the job done faster ?
A : The tractor will get the job done faster because it has more power .
The cannon shoots a ball straight ahead , giving it horizontal motion .
At the same time , gravity pulls the ball down toward the ground .
Acids are ionic compounds that produce positive hydrogen ions -LRB- H + -RRB- when dissolved in water .
Ionic compounds are compounds that contain positive metal ions and negative nonmetal ions held together by ionic bonds .
-LRB- Ions are atoms that have become charged particles by gaining or losing electrons . -RRB-
This is represented by the chemical equation : H O 2 HCl H + + Cl
Certain compounds , called indicators , change color when acids come into contact with them , so indicators can be used to detect acids .
An example of an indicator is the compound called litmus .
URL : Drawing of blue litmus paper turning red in acid .
The strength of acids is measured on a scale called the pH scale .
The pH value of a solution represents its concentration of hydrogen ions .
A pH value of 7 indicates a neutral solution , and a pH value less than 7 indicates an acidic solution .
Some other uses of acids are be seen in the Figure 1.3 .
Bases are ionic compounds that produce negative hydroxide ions -LRB- OH -RRB- when dissolved in water .
An ionic com - pound contains positive metal ions and negative nonmetal ions held together by ionic bonds .
-LRB- Ions are atoms that have become charged particles because they have either lost or gained electrons . -RRB-
This can be represented by the equation : H O 2 NaOH OH + Na +
Certain compounds , called indicators , change color when bases come into contact with them , so they can be used to detect bases .
If you place a few drops of a base on a strip of red litmus paper , the paper will turn blue .
Red cabbage juice can also detect bases , as you can see in this video .
The strength of bases is measured on a scale called the pH scale , which ranges from 0 to 14 .
On this scale , a pH value of 7 indicates a neutral solution , and a pH value greater than 7 indicates a basic solution .
For example , soaps contain bases such as potassium hydroxide -LRB- KOH -RRB- .
Other uses of bases can be seen in the Figure 1.2 .
Nothing else in the universe is known to travel this fast .
Although all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed across space , they may differ in their wavelengths , frequencies , and energy levels .
Wavelengths of electromagnetic waves range from longer than a soccer field to shorter than the diameter of an atom .
Frequencies of electromagnetic waves range from thousands of waves per second to trillions of waves per second .
The energy of electromagnetic waves depends on their frequency .
This relationship is represented by the equation : Speed = Wavelength Frequency The equation for wave speed can be rewritten as : Speed Speed Frequency = Wavelength or Wavelength = Frequency Therefore , if either wavelength or frequency is known , the missing value can be calculated .
Its frequency can be found by substituting these values into the frequency equation : Frequency = 3.0108 m/s 3.0 m = 1.0 108 waves/s , or 1.0 108 Hz Q : What is the wavelength of an electromagnetic wave that has a frequency of 3.0 108 hertz ?
Hemoglobin is a compound in the class of compounds called proteins .
Proteins contain carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , and sulfur .
URL : Q : What do you think the ribbons in the colorful hemoglobin molecule pictured in the opening image represent ?
A : The ribbons represent chains of amino acids .
The structural formula of the simplest amino acid , called glycine , is shown in the Figure 1.1 .
A protein molecule is made from one or more long chains of amino acids , each linked to its neighbors by covalent bonds .
If a protein has more than one chain , the chains are held together by weaker bonds , such as hydrogen bonds .
Some of their functions include : making up tissues as components of muscle .
carrying materials around the body as transport proteins -LRB- see the example of hemoglobin in the Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
This fusion reaction releases a huge amount of energy and takes place in nature only at the extremely high temperatures of stars such as the sun .
Protons are found in the nucleus of the atom .
Together with neutrons , they make up virtually all of the mass of an atom .
URL : Q : How do you think the sun is related to protons ?
In the sun , as well as in other stars , protons from hydrogen atoms combine , or fuse , to form nuclei of helium atoms .
The number of protons in an atom determines the electrical charge of the nucleus .
Protons are made of fundamental particles called quarks and gluons .
As you can see in the Figure 1.1 , a proton contains three quarks -LRB- colored circles -RRB- and three streams of gluons -LRB- wavy white lines -RRB- .
Two of the quarks are called up quarks -LRB- u -RRB- , and the third quark is called a down quark -LRB- d -RRB- .
The gluons carry the strong nuclear force between quarks , binding them together .
This force is needed to overcome the electric force of repulsion between positive protons .
Although protons were discovered almost 100 years ago , the quarks and gluons inside them were discovered much more recently .
Scientists are still learning more about these fundamental particles .
A pulley is a simple machine that consists of a rope and grooved wheel .
The rope fits into the groove in the wheel , and pulling on the rope turns the wheel .
Pulleys are generally used to lift objects , especially heavy objects .
The object lifted by a pulley is called the load .
The force applied to the pulley is called the effort .
Q : Can you guess what the pulley pictured above is used for ?
A : The pulley is used to lift heavy buckets full of water out of the well .
Some pulleys are attached to a beam or other secure surface and remain fixed in place .
of Rope Segments Pulling Up 1 Ideal Mechani - cal Advantage 1 Change Direction Force ?
Other pulleys are attached to the object being moved and are moveable themselves .
Sometimes , fixed and moveable pulleys are used together .
The three types of pulleys are compared in the Table 1.1 .
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine such as a pulley is the factor by which the machine changes the force applied to it .
In the single moveable pulley , two rope segments pull up on the load , so the ideal mechanical advantage is 2 .
This type of pulley doesnt change the direction of the force applied to it , but it increases the force by a factor of 2 .
In a compound pulley , two or more rope segments pull up on the load , so the ideal mechanical advantage is 2 or greater than 2 .
This type of pulley may or may not change the direction of the force applied to itit depends on the number and arrangement of pulleysbut the increase in force may be great .
Q : If a compound pulley has four rope segments pulling up on the load , by what factor does it multiply the force applied to the pulley ?
This means that the compound pulley multiplies the force applied to it by a factor of 4 .
For example if 400 Newtons of force were applied to the pulley , the pulley would apply 1600 Newtons of force to the load .
All machines must overcome friction , so the ideal mechanical advantage is always somewhat greater than the actual mechanical advantage of the machine as it is used in the real world .
In a pulley , the ideal mechanical advantage is equal to the number of rope segments pulling up on the object .
The more rope segments that are helping to do the lifting work , the less force that is needed for the job .
In the single fixed pulley , only one rope segment pulls up on the load , so the ideal mechanical advantage is 1 .
In other words , this type of pulley doesnt increase the force that is applied to it .
Electromagnetic waves consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields .
Electromagnetic waves vary in their wavelengths and frequencies , and higher-frequency waves have more energy .
The full range of wavelengths of electromagnetic waves is called the electromagnetic spectrum .
Electromagnetic waves on the left side of the Figure 1.1 are called radio waves .
In radio broadcasts , sounds are encoded in radio waves , and then the waves are sent out through the atmosphere from a radio tower .
A radio receiver detects the waves and changes them back to sounds .
Frequency modulation allows FM waves to encode more information than does amplitude modulation , so FM broadcasts usually produce clearer sounds than AM broadcasts .
However , the relatively short wavelengths of FM waves means that they dont reflect off the ionosphere as AM waves do .
This is also shown in the Figure 1.2 .
As a result , FM waves can not reach very distant receivers .
The changes make the nighttime ionosphere even better at reflecting AM radio waves .
How do you think this might affect the distance AM radio waves travel at night ?
A : With greater reflection off the ionosphere , AM waves can travel even farther at night than they can during the day .
Radio receivers can often pick up radio broadcasts at night from cities that are hundreds of miles away .
AM stands for amplitude modulation .
In AM broadcasts , sound signals are encoded by changing the am - plitude , or maximum height , of radio waves .
AM broadcasts use longer wavelength radio waves than FM broadcasts .
Because of their longer wavelengths , AM waves reflect off a layer of the upper atmosphere called the ionosphere .
You can see how this happens in the Figure 1.2 .
Because the waves are reflected , they can reach radio receivers that are very far away from the radio tower .
Television broadcasts also use radio waves -LRB- see Figure 1.2 -RRB- .
For TV broadcasts , sounds are encoded with frequency modulation , and pictures are encoded with amplitude modulation .
Radioactive decay is the process in which the nuclei of radioactive atoms emit charged particles and energy , which are called by the general term radiation .
Radioactive atoms have unstable nuclei , and when the nuclei emit radiation , they become more stable .
In a nuclear reaction , one element may change into another .
In all three types , nuclei emit radiation , but the nature of the radiation differs .
The Table 1.1 shows the radiation emitted in each type of decay .
Both alpha and beta decay change the number of protons in an atoms nucleus , thereby changing the atom to a different element .
In alpha decay , the nucleus loses two protons .
In beta decay , the nucleus either loses a proton or gains a proton .
In gamma decay , no change in proton number occurs , so the atom does not become a different element .
Q : If the radioactive element polonium -LRB- Po -RRB- undergoes alpha decay , what element does it become ?
The charged particles and energy emitted during radioactive decay can harm living things , but the three types of radioactive decay arent equally dangerous .
For an atom of one element to change into a different element , the number of protons in its nucleus must change .
A : The starting element must be radioactive , and its nuclei must gain or lose protons .
Radioactivity is the ability of an atom to emit , or give off , charged particles and energy from its nucleus .
Only unstable nuclei emit radiation .
The nuclei of these elements must lose protons to become more stable .
Radioactivity was discovered in 1896 by a French physicist named Antoine Henri Becquerel , who is pictured 1.1 .
Becquerel was experimenting with uranium , which was known to glow after being exposed to sunlight .
He wasnt expecting the uranium to leave an image on the plate without first being exposed to sunlight .
Becquerel had discovered that uranium gives off rays of energy on its own .
Another scientist , who worked with Becquerel , actually came up with the term radioactivity .
Becquerel wanted to see if the glow was caused by rays of energy , like rays of light or X-rays .
He placed a bit of uranium on a photographic plate after exposing the uranium to sunlight .
The plate was similar to the film that is used today to take X-rays , and Becquerel expected the uranium to leave an image on the plate .
The next day , there was an image on the plate , just as Becquerel expected .
Atoms of the same element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes .
These isotopes are called radioisotopes .
Find carbon in the Figure 1.1 , and youll see that its atomic number is 6 .
This means that all carbon atoms have 6 protons per nucleus .
Q : How is carbon-14 used to estimate the ages of fossils ?
A : Living things take in carbon , including tiny amounts of carbon-14 , throughout life .
The carbon-14 constantly decays , but more carbon-14 is taken in all the time to replace it .
After living things die , no new carbon-14 is taken in , and the carbon-14 they already have keeps decaying .
The older a fossil is , the less carbon-14 it still has , so the remaining amount can be measured to estimate the fossils age .
These carbon atoms are called carbon-12 , where 12 is the number of protons -LRB- 6 -RRB- plus neutrons -LRB- 6 -RRB- .
This gives carbon-12 nuclei a 1:1 ratio of protons to neutrons , so carbon-12 nuclei are stable .
Carbon atoms with 8 neutrons are called carbon-14 -LRB- 6 protons + 8 neutrons -RRB- .
Elements with more than 92 protons have such unstable nuclei that they dont even exist in nature .
Reactants are substances that start a chemical reaction .
Products are substances that are produced in the reaction .
In many reactions , the reaction also occurs in the opposite direction .
This is represented with another arrow pointing in the opposite direction -LRB- -RRB- .
Q : Write a general chemical equation for the reaction that occurs when a fuel such as candle wax burns .
A : Bonds break in the reactants , and new bonds form in the products .
As a result , the atoms end up in different combinations in the products .
This makes the products new substances that are chemically different from the reactants .
Consider the example of water forming from hydrogen and oxygen .
Both hydrogen and oxygen gases exist as diatomic -LRB- two-atom -RRB- molecules .
The Figure 1.1 shows that bonds must break to separate the atoms in the hydrogen and oxygen molecules .
Then new bonds must form between hydrogen and oxygen atoms to form water molecules .
Q : Watch the animation of a similar chemical reaction at the following URL .
Other potential signs include : Change in temperature-Heat is released or absorbed during the reaction .
Production of a gas-Gas bubbles are released during the reaction .
Production of a solid-A solid settles out of a liquid solution .
Look carefully at the Figures 1.1 , 1.2 , and 1.3 .
All of the photos demonstrate chemical reactions .
Dissolving an antacid tablet in water produces a fizzy drink .
Adding acid to milk produces solid curds of cottage cheese .
A replacement reaction occurs when elements switch places in compounds .
This type of reaction involves ions -LRB- electrically charged versions of atoms -RRB- and ionic compounds .
These are compounds in which positive ions of a metal and negative ions of a nonmetal are held together by ionic bonds .
Generally , a more reactive element replaces an element that is less reactive , and the less reactive element is set free from the compound .
A : One way they differ is that a single replacement reaction involves one reactant compound , whereas a double replacement reaction involves two reactant compounds .
Keep reading to learn more about these two types of reactions .
A single replacement reaction occurs when one element replaces another in a single compound .
This type of reaction has the general equation : A + BC B + AC In this equation , A represents a more reactive element and BC represents the original compound .
During the reaction , A replaces B , forming the product compound AC and releasing the less reactive element B.
A colorless solid compound named potassium hydroxide -LRB- KOH -RRB- forms , and hydrogen gas -LRB- H2 -RRB- is set free .
The equation for the reaction is : 2K + 2H2 O 2KOH + H2 In this reaction , a potassium ion replaces one of the hydrogen atoms in each molecule of water .
Q : Find potassium in the periodic table of the elements .
What other element might replace hydrogen in water in a similar replacement reaction ?
A : Another group 1 element , such as lithium or sodium , might be involved in a similar replacement reaction with water .
A double replacement reaction occurs when two ionic compounds exchange ions .
This produces two new ionic compounds .
Q : When iron sulfide -LRB- FeS -RRB- and hydrogen chloride -LRB- HCl -RRB- react together , a double replacement reaction occurs .
A double replacement reaction can be represented by the general equation : AB + CD AD + CB AB and CD are the two reactant compounds , and AD and CB are the two product compounds that result from the reaction .
In an ionic compound , the positive metal ion is always written first , followed by the negative nonmetal ion .
Therefore , A and C must always come first , followed by D or B.
This reaction is represented by the equation : NaCl + AgF NaF + AgCl During the reaction , chloride and fluoride ions change places , so two new compounds are formed in the products : sodium fluoride -LRB- NaF -RRB- and silver chloride -LRB- AgCl -RRB- .
In 1804 , almost a century before the nucleus was discovered , the English scientist John Dalton provided evidence for the existence of the atom .
Dalton thought that atoms were the smallest particles of matter , which couldnt be divided into smaller particles .
In 1897 , another English scientist , named J. J. Thomson , discovered the electron .
Because atoms are neutral in electric charge , Thomson assumed that atoms must also contain areas of positive charge to cancel out the negatively charged electrons .
He thought that an atom was like a plum pudding , consisting mostly of positively charged matter with negative electrons scattered through it .
The nucleus of the atom was discovered next .
It was discovered in 1911 by a scientist from New Zealand named Ernest Rutherford , who is pictured in Figure 1.1 .
Through his clever research , Rutherford showed that the positive charge of an atom is confined to a tiny massive region at the center of the atom , rather than being spread evenly throughout the pudding of the atom as Thomson had suggested .
The way Rutherford discovered the atomic nucleus is a good example of the role of creativity in science .
His quest actually began in 1899 when he discovered that some elements give off positively charged particles that can penetrate just about anything .
Q : What would you expect to happen when the alpha particles strike the gold foil ?
A : The alpha particles would penetrate the gold foil .
Alpha particles are positive , so they might be repelled by any areas of positive charge inside the gold atoms .
Assuming a plum pudding model of the atom , Rutherford predicted that the areas of positive charge in the gold atoms would deflect , or bend , the path of all the alpha particles as they passed through .
Most of the alpha particles passed straight through the gold foil as though it wasnt there .
The particles seemed to be passing through empty space .
Only a few of the alpha particles were deflected from their straight path , as Rutherford had predicted .
Surprisingly , a tiny percentage of the particles bounced back from the foil like a basketball bouncing off a backboard !
A : You can infer that most of the alpha particles were not repelled by any positive charge , whereas a few were repelled by a strong positive charge .
He chose gold because it can be pounded into sheets that are only 0.00004 cm thick .
Surrounding the sheet of gold foil , he placed a screen that glowed when alpha particles struck it .
A small slit in the screen allowed the beam of alpha particles to reach the foil from the particle emitter .
Rutherford made the same inferences .
He concluded that all of the positive charge and virtually all of the mass of an atom are concentrated in one tiny area and the rest of the atom is mostly empty space .
Rutherford called the area of concentrated positive charge the nucleus .
He predictedand soon discoveredthat the nucleus contains positively charged particles , which he named protons .
Rutherford also predicted the existence of neutral nuclear particles called neutrons , but he failed to find them .
Rutherfords discoveries meant that Thomsons plum pudding model was incorrect .
Positive charge is not spread evenly throughout an atom .
In Rutherfords model of the atom , which is shown in the Figure 1.3 , the electrons move around the massive nucleus like planets orbiting the sun .
Thats why his model is called the planetary model .
Rutherford didnt know exactly where or how electrons orbit the nucleus .
That research would be undertaken by later scientists , beginning with Niels Bohr in 1913 .
Nonetheless , Rutherfords model is still often used to represent the atom .
Saturated hydrocarbons are hydrocarbons that contain only single bonds between carbon atoms .
They are called saturated because each carbon atom is bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible .
In other words , the carbon atoms are saturated with hydrogen .
In this compound , named ethane , each carbon atom is bonded to three hydrogen atoms .
In the structural formula , each dash -LRB- - -RRB- represents a single covalent bond , in which two atoms share one pair of valence electrons .
Saturated hydrocarbons are given the general name of alkanes .
The name of specific alkanes always ends in - ane .
The chemical formulas and properties of methane , ethane , and other small alkanes are listed in the Table 1.1 .
The boiling and melting points of alkanes are determined mainly by the number of carbon atoms they have .
Alkanes with more carbon atoms generally boil and melt at higher temperatures .
Structural formulas are often used to represent hydrocarbon compounds because the molecules can have different shapes and a structural formula shows how the atoms are arranged .
Hydrocarbons may form straight chains , A -RRB- In a straight-chain molecule , all the carbon atoms are lined up in a row like cars of a train .
The carbon atoms form the backbone of the molecule .
C -RRB- In a cyclic molecule , the chain of carbon atoms is joined at the two ends to form a ring .
Each ring usually contains just five or six carbon atoms , but rings can join together to form larger molecules .
Three commonly used types of graphs are bar graphs , circle graphs , and line graphs .
The data in Table 1.1 shows the average number of tornadoes per year for the ten U.S. cities that have the most tornadoes .
The data were averaged over the time period 1950-2007 .
Rank City 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Clearwater , FL Oklahoma City , OK Tampa-St . Petersburg , FL Houston , TX Tulsa , OK New Orleans , LA Melbourne , FL Indianapolis , IN Fort Worth , TX Lubbock , TX Average Number of Tornadoes -LRB- per 1000 Square Miles -RRB- 7.4 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.0 1.9 1.7 1.7 1.6 Bar graphs are especially useful for comparing values for different things , such as the average numbers of tornadoes for different cities .
The bar graph below shows one way that these data could be presented .
A : The x-axis represents cities , and the y-axis represents average numbers of tornadoes .
A : Yes ; the x-axis could represent average numbers of tornadoes , and the y-axis could represent cities .
The data in Table 1.2 shows the percent of all U.S. tornadoes by tornado strength for the years 1986 to 1995 .
In this table , tornadoes are rated on a scale called the F scale .
Tornado Scale -LRB- F-scale rating -RRB- F0 F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 Percent of all U.S. Tornadoes 55.0 % 31.6 % 10.0 % 2.6 % 0.7 % 0.1 % Circle graphs are used to show percents -LRB- or fractions -RRB- of a whole , such as the percents of F0 to F5 tornadoes out of all tornadoes .
Q : What if the Table 1.2 on tornado strength listed the numbers of tornadoes rather than the percents of tornadoes ?
Could a circle graph be used to display these data ?
A : No , a circle graph can only be used to show percents -LRB- or fractions -RRB- of a whole .
However , the numbers could be used to calculate percents , which could then be displayed in a circle graph .
It lists the number of tornadoes in the U.S. per month , averaged over the years 2009 to 2011 .
Month January February March April May June July August September October November December Average Number of Tornadoes 17 33 74 371 279 251 122 57 39 65 39 34 Line graphs are especially useful for showing changes over time , or time trends in data , such as how the average number of tornadoes varies throughout the year .
Therefore , a line graph would be a good choice to display the data in the Table 1.3 .
A : The number of tornadoes rises rapidly from a low in January to a peak in April .
This is followed by a relatively slow decline throughout the rest of the year .
To be useful , a model must closely represent the real thing in important ways , but it must be simpler and easier to understand than the real thing .
Q : What might be examples of things that would be modeled in physical science because they are difficult to investigate directly ?
A : Examples include extremely small things such as atoms , very distant objects such as stars , and complex systems such as the electric grid that carries electricity throughout the country .
A : Types of models include two-dimensional diagrams , three-dimensional structures , mathematical formulas , and computer simulations .
Examples of simple two-dimensional models in physical science are described below .
In a real molecule , electrons spin around the nuclei at the center of the atoms in a cloud , rather than in neat , circular orbits , as shown in the model .
The atoms of a real water molecule also contain even smaller particles than protons , neutrons , and electrons .
Horizontal lines with + and - signs represent a battery .
The parts labeled R1 , R2 , and R3 are devices that use electricity provided by the battery .
The model shows that each molecule of water consists of one atom of oxygen and two atoms of hydrogen .
Q : In the electric circuit diagram , what do the black lines connecting the battery and electric devices represent ?
A : The black lines represent electric wires .
The wires are necessary to carry electric current from the battery to the electric devices and back to the battery again .
Q : How is a circuit diagram simpler and easier to understand than an actual electric circuit ?
A : A circuit diagram shows only the parts of the circuit that carry electric current , and it uses simple symbols to represent them .
A : The model shows the number of atomic particlesprotons , neutrons , and electronsin each type of atom .
It also shows that each hydrogen atom in a water molecule shares its electron with the oxygen atom .
Q : Do you think this water molecule model satisfies the criteria of a useful model ?
A : The model shows the basic structure of a water molecule and how the atoms in the molecule share electrons .
These features of the water molecule explain important properties of water .
Chemistry is the study of matter and energy and how they interact , mainly at the level of atoms and molecules .
Basic concepts in chemistry include chemicals , which are specific types of matter , and chemical reactions .
Some people also think that the patina looks attractive .
In a chemical reaction , atoms or molecules of certain types of matter combine chemically to form other types of matter .
Q : How do you think chemistry explains why the copper on the Statue of Liberty is green instead of brownish red ?
A : The copper has become tarnished .
The tarnishalso called patinais a compound called copper carbonate , which is green .
Copper carbonate forms when copper undergoes a chemical reaction with carbon dioxide in moist air .
The green patina that forms on copper actually preserves the underlying metal .
Everything you touch , taste , or smell is made of chemicals , and chemical reactions underlie many common changes .
For example , chemistry explains how food cooks , why laundry detergent cleans your clothes , and why antacid tablets relieve an upset stomach .
Other examples are illustrated in the Figure 1.1 .
Your body is made of chemicals , and chemical changes constantly take place within it .
Its a very broad field because it is concerned with matter and energy at all levelsfrom the most fundamental particles of matter to the entire universe .
They have a curved surface that reflects light at different angles .
This explains why the images they form are distorted .
Important concepts in physics include motion , forces such as magnetism and gravity , and forms of energy such as light , sound , and electrical energy .
Q : How do you think physics explains the distorted images formed by a funhouse mirror ?
A : Physics explains how energy interacts with matter .
In this case , for example , physics explains how visible light reflects from mirrors to form images .
Light reflected from a flat mirror forms an image that looks the same as the object in front of it .
Funhouse mirrors , like the one pictured above , are different .
Physics can help you understand just about everything in the world around you .
Thats because everything around you consists of matter and energy .
Like a moving tennis racket , anything that moves has energy because it is moving , including your eyes as they read this sentence .
Several examples of matter and energy interacting are pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Read how physics explains each example .
A : Like the strings of cello , anything that vibrates produces waves of energy that travel through matter .
Like an incandescent light bulb , anything that glows consists of matter that produces light energy .
For example , fireflies use chemicals to produce light energy .
A screw is a simple machine that consists of an inclined plane wrapped around a central cylinder .
The cap of the bottle pictured on the right is another example of a screw .
Screws move objects to a greater depth -LRB- or higher elevation -RRB- by increasing the force applied to the screw .
Many screws are used to hold things together , such as two pieces of wood or a screw cap and bottle .
When you use a screw , you apply force to turn the inclined plane .
The screw , in turn , applies greater force to the object , such as the wood or bottle top .
Q : Can you identify the inclined plane in each example of a screw pictured in the Figure 1.1 ?
A : The inclined plane of the screw on the left consists of the ridges , or threads , that wrap around the central cylinder of the screw .
The inclined plane of the cap on the right consists of the ridges that wrap around the inner sides of the cap .
The mechanical advantage of a simple machine is the factor by which it multiplies the force applied to the machine .
The force applied by the screw -LRB- output force -RRB- is always greater than the force applied to the screw -LRB- input force -RRB- .
Look at the two screws in the Figure 1.2 .
This screw has a greater mechanical advantage and is easier to turn than the screw on the left , so it takes less force to penetrate the wood with the right screw .
The trade-off is that more turns of the screw are needed to do the job because the distance over which the input force must be applied is greater .
Q : Why is it harder to turn a screw with more widely spaced threads ?
A : The screw moves farther with each turn when the threads are more widely space , so more force must be applied to turn the screw and cover the greater distance .
In any measurement , the number of significant figures is the number of digits thought to be correct by the person doing the measuring .
It includes all digits that can be read directly from the measuring device plus one estimated digit .
This falls about half way between the mark for 36 mL and the mark for 37 mL , so a reasonable estimate would be 36.5 mL .
Look at the sketch of a beaker below .
How much blue liquid does the beaker contain ?
The top of the liquid falls between the mark for 40 mL and 50 mL , but its closer to 50 mL .
In this measurement , the first digit -LRB- 4 -RRB- is known for certain and the second digit -LRB- 7 -RRB- is an estimate , so the measurement has two significant figures .
Now look at the graduated cylinder sketched below .
The examples above show that its easy to count the number of significant figures when you are making a measure - ment .
But what if someone else has made the measurement ?
The zeros just show that the 4 represents hundreds of thousands and the 7 represents tens of thousands .
Trailing zeros that arent needed to show where the decimal point falls are significant .
A : Both 20,080 and 2.080 contain four significant figures , but 2000 has just one significant figure .
How do you know which digits are known for certain and which are estimated ?
When measurements are used in a calculation , the answer can not have more significant figures than the measurement with the fewest significant figures .
As another example , assume that you want to calculate the volume of the block of wood shown below .
The volume of the block is represented by the formula : Volume = length width height Therefore , you would do the following calculation : Volume = 1.2 cm 1.0 cm 1 cm = 1.2 cm3 Q : Does this answer have the correct number of significant figures ?
To get the correct answer in the volume calculation above , rounding was necessary .
Rounding is done when one or more ending digits are dropped to get the correct number of significant figures .
For example , when rounding 2.345 to three significant figures , round down to 2.34 .
This rule may seem arbitrary , but in a series of many calculations , any rounding errors should cancel each other out .
In this example , the answer was rounded down to a lower number -LRB- from 1.2 to 1 -RRB- .
Sometimes the answer is rounded up to a higher number .
For example , when rounding 2.344 to three significant figures , round down to 2.34 .
If the digit to be rounded is greater than 5 , then round up .
For example , when rounding 2.346 to three significant figures , round up to 2.35 .
If the digit to be rounded is 5 , round up if the digit before 5 is odd , and round down if digit before 5 is even .
Work is done whenever a force moves an object over a distance .
The amount of work done is represented by the equation : Work = Force x Distance When you use a machine , you apply force to the machine .
The force you apply to the machine is applied over a given distance , called the input distance .
Q : If a machine increases the force applied , what does this tell you about the distance over which the force is applied by the machine : A : The machine must apply the force over a shorter distance .
Thats because a machine doesnt change the amount of work and work equals force times distance .
Therefore , if force increases , distance must decrease .
For the same reason , if a machine increases the distance over which the force is applied , it must apply less force .
Examples of machines that increase force are steering wheels and pliers -LRB- see Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Read below to find out how both of these machines work .
In each case , the machine applies more force than the user applies to the machine , but the machine applies the force over a shorter distance .
Examples of machines that increase the distance over which force is applied are leaf rakes and hammers -LRB- see Figure which the force is applied , but it reduces the strength of the force .
Two examples of machines that work this way are the claw ends of hammers and flagpole pulleys .
In both cases , the direction of the force applied by the user is reversed by the machine .
Q : If the pulley only changes the direction of the force , how does it make the work of raising the flag easier ?
A : The pulley makes it easier to lift the flag because it allows a person to pull down on the rope and add his or her own weight to the effort , rather than simply lifting the load .
The six types are pictured in the Figure 1.4 .
Youve probably used some of these simple machines yourself .
These machines are called compound machines .
Many compound machines are much more complex and consist of many simple machines .
In science , sound is defined as the transfer of energy from a vibrating object in waves that travel through matter .
Most people commonly use the term sound to mean what they hear when sound waves enter their ears .
The tree above generated sound waves when it fell to the ground , so it made sound according to the scientific definition .
All sound waves begin with vibrating matter .
Look at the first guitar string on the left in the Figure 1.1 .
Plucking the string makes it vibrate .
The diagram below the figure shows the wave generated by the vibrating string .
The moving string repeatedly pushes against the air particles next to it , which causes the air particles to vibrate .
The vibrations spread through the air in all directions away from the guitar string as longitudinal waves .
Q : If there were no air particles to carry the vibrations away from the guitar string , how would sound reach the ear ?
A : It wouldnt unless the vibrations were carried by another medium .
The fact that sound can not travel through empty space was first demonstrated in the 1600s by a scientist named Robert Boyle .
The clock could be heard ticking through the air and glass of the jar .
Thats because the sound couldnt travel away from the clock without air particles to pass the sound energy along .
Most of the sounds we hear reach our ears through the air , but sounds can also travel through liquids and solids .
If you swim underwateror even submerge your ears in bathwaterany sounds you hear have traveled to your ears through the water .
Some solids , including glass and metals , are very good at transmitting sounds .
Foam rubber and heavy fabrics , on the other hand , tend to muffle sounds .
Most of the visible light on Earth comes from the sun .
Incandescent light bulbs also produce light in this way .
When electric current passes through a wire filament inside an incandescent bulb , the wire gets so hot that it glows .
A : Flames also produce incandescent light .
For example , burning candles , oil lamps , and bonfires produce light in this way .
The jellyfish in the opening photo above produces light by bioluminescence .
Fireflies give off visible light to attract mates .
Producing light without heat is called luminescence .
Luminescence , in turn , can occur in several different ways : One type of luminescence is called fluorescence .
In this process , a substance absorbs shorter-wavelength ultraviolet light and then gives off light in the visible range of wavelengths .
Certain minerals produce light in this way , including gemstones such as amethyst , diamond , and emerald .
In this process , a substance gives off light when an electric current passes through it .
Gases such as neon , argon , and krypton produce light by this means .
The car dash lights in the Figure 1.2 are produced by electroluminescence .
Many other objects appear to produce their own light , but they actually just reflect light from another source .
Being lit by another source is called illumination .
The moon in the Figure 1.4 is glowing so brightly that you can see shadows under the trees .
Everything you can see that doesnt produce its own light is illuminated by light from some other source .
Speed determines how far something travels in a given amount of time .
Even if speed varies during the course of a trip , its easy to calculate the average speed by using this formula : speed = distance time For example , assume you go on a car trip with your family .
The average speed for the trip is : 120 mi 3h = 40 mi/h speed = Q : Terri rode her bike very slowly to the top of a big hill .
It took Terri 41 hour to make the round trip .
For example , you might travel 65 miles per hour on a highway but only 20 miles per hour on a city street -LRB- see the pictures in the Figure 1.1 . -RRB-
Cars race by in a blur of motion on an open highway but crawl at a snails pace when they hit city traffic .
To calculate distance from speed and time , use this version of the average speed formula given above : distance = speed time For example , if a car travels at an average speed of 60 km/h for 5 hours , then the distance it travels is : distance = 60 km/h 5 h = 300 km To calculate time from speed and distance , use this version of the formula : time = distance speed Q : If you walk 6 km at an average speed of 3 km/h , how much time does it take ?
Youll often see the speed of sound given as 343 meters per second .
Sound waves are mechanical waves , and mechanical waves can only travel through matter .
The matter through which the waves travel is called the medium -LRB- plural , media -RRB- .
The Table 1.1 gives the speed of sound in several different media .
Generally , sound waves travel most quickly through solids , followed by liquids , and then by gases .
Medium -LRB- 20 C -RRB- Dry Air Speed of Sound Waves -LRB- m/s -RRB- 343 Medium -LRB- 20 C -RRB- Water Wood Glass Aluminum Speed of Sound Waves -LRB- m/s -RRB- 1437 3850 4540 6320 Q : The table gives the speed of sound in dry air .
A : Sound travels at a higher speed through water than air , so it travels more quickly through air that contains water vapor than it does through dry air .
The speed of sound also depends on the temperature of the medium .
At a lower temperature , particles of the medium are moving more slowly , so it takes them longer to transfer the energy of the sound waves .
A : For each 1 degree Celsius that temperature decreases , the speed of sound decreases by 0.6 m/s .
Charges build up when negative electrons are transferred from one object to another .
A : When the air is very dry , electric charges are more likely to build up objects because they can not travel easily through the dry air .
This makes a shock more likely when you touch another object .
The object that gives up electrons becomes positively charged , and the object that accepts the electrons becomes negatively charged .
This can happen in several ways .
One way electric charges can build up is through friction between materials that differ in their ability to give up or accept electrons .
As a result of this transfer of electrons , positive charges build up on the mat and negative charges build up on you .
Once an object becomes electrically charged , it is likely to remain charged until it touches another object or at least comes very close to another object .
Thats because electric charges can not travel easily through air , especially if the air is dry .
Q : Youre more likely to get a shock in the winter when the air is very dry .
What happens when you have become negatively charged and your hand approaches the metal doorknocker ?
Your negatively charged hand repels electrons in the metal , so the electrons move to the other side of the knocker .
This makes the side of the knocker closest to your hand positively charged .
As your negatively charged hand gets very close to the positively charged side of the metal , the air between your hand and the knocker also becomes electrically charged .
This allows electrons to suddenly flow from your hand to the knocker .
During a rainstorm , clouds develop regions of positive and negative charge due to the movement of air molecules , water drops , and ice particles .
The negative charges are concentrated at the base of the clouds , and the positive charges are concentrated at the top .
The negative charges repel electrons on the ground beneath them , so the ground below the clouds becomes positively charged .
At first , the atmosphere prevents electrons from flowing away from areas of negative charge and toward areas of positive charge .
As more charges build up , however , the air between the oppositely charged areas also becomes charged .
When this happens , static electricity is discharged as bolts of lightning .
A surface wave is a wave that travels along the surface of a medium .
A : Most ocean waves are caused by wind blowing across the water .
Moving air molecules transfer some of their energy to molecules of ocean water .
The energy travels across the surface of the water in waves .
A transverse wave is a wave in which particles of the medium move up and down perpendicular to the direction of the wave .
In deep water , particles of water just move in circles .
You can see how the waves start to drag on the bottom in shallow water .
This creates friction that slows down the bottoms of the waves , while the tops of the waves keep moving at the same speed .
The difference in speed causes the waves to get steeper until they topple over and break .
Q : In this diagram of a wave breaking near shore , where do you think a surfer would try to catch the wave ?
A : The surfer would try to catch the wave where it starts to steepen and lean forward toward the shore .
A synthesis reaction occurs when two or more reactants combine to form a single product .
A synthesis reaction can be represented by the general equation : A+BC In this equation , the letters A and B represent the reactants that begin the reaction , and the letter C represents the product that is synthesized in the reaction .
Another example of a synthesis reaction is the combination of sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- and chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- to produce sodium chloride -LRB- NaCl -RRB- .
This reaction is represented by the chemical equation : 2Na + Cl2 2NaCl Sodium is a highly reactive metal , and chlorine is a poisonous gas .
Both elements are pictured in the Figure 1.1 .
Sodium chloride is commonly called table salt , which is neither reactive nor poisonous .
The development of new technologywhether its a simple kite or a complex machineis called technological design .
The technological design process is a step-by-step approach to finding a solution to a problem .
A : Possible constraints might include the shape and size of the kite and the materials you use to make it .
Physical design constraints include factors such as natural laws and properties of materials .
A kite , for example , will fly only if its shape allows air currents to lift it .
Otherwise , gravity will keep it on the ground .
Social design constraints include factors such as ease of use , safety , attractiveness , and cost .
For example , a kite string should be easy to unwind as the wind carries the kite higher .
For example , a design might be very good at solving a problem , but it might be too expensive to be practical .
Or a design might be very attractive , but it might not be safe to use .
Choosing the best design often involves weighing the pros and cons of different options and deciding which ones are most important .
Or you might want to make a kite using a certain material that you really like , but the material might cost more than you can afford to spend .
Major advances in technol - ogy have influenced every aspect of life , including transportation , food production , manufacturing , communication , medicine , and the arts .
For example , gasoline-powered cars and trucks add many pollutants to the atmosphere .
The pollutants harm peoples health and contribute to global climate change .
Thats because technology has the goal of solving human problems , so new technologies usually make life better .
Sometimes , however , new technologies affect people in negative ways .
For example , using a new product or process might cause human health problems or pollute the environment .
They help people and goods move quickly all over the world .
However , most of them pollute the environment .
Few technologies have impacted society as greatly as the powerful steam engine developed by Scottish inventor James Watt in 1775 -LRB- see Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
People flocked to the new factories for jobs , and densely populated towns and cities grew up around the factories .
Working conditions in the factories were also bad , with long hours and the pace set by machines .
Even young children worked in the factories , damaging their health and giving them little opportunity for education or play .
Q : In addition to factory machines , the steam engine was used to power farm machinery , trains , and ships .
A : Farm machinery replaced human labor and allowed fewer people to produce more food .
This is why many rural people migrated to the new towns and cities to look for work in factories .
Steam-powered trains and ships made it easier for people to migrate .
Food and factory goods could also be transported on steam-powered trains and ships , making them available to far more people .
For the first time in history , people did not have to rely on human or animal muscle , wind , or water for power .
With the steam engine to power machines , new factories sprang up all over Britain .
The Industrial Revolution began in Britain the late 1700s .
Average income and population both began to grow faster than ever before .
Thermal conduction occurs when particles of warmer matter bump into particles of cooler matter and transfer some of their thermal energy to the cooler particles .
Metals are especially good thermal conductors because they have freely moving electrons that can transfer thermal energy quickly and easily .
When hot water flows through the coils of the radiator , the metal quickly heats up by conduction and then radiates thermal energy into the surrounding air .
Q : Thermal conductors have many uses , but sometimes its important to prevent the transfer of thermal energy .
A : One example is staying warm on a cold day .
One way to retain your own thermal energy on a cold day is to wear clothes that trap air .
Notice that the outside of the toaster pictured in the opening image is made of plastic .
The plastic casing helps prevent the transfer of thermal energy from the heating element inside to the outer surface of the toaster where it could cause burns .
Q : Thermal insulators have many practical uses besides the uses mentioned above .
A : Thermal insulators are often used to keep food or drinks hot or cold .
For example , Styrofoam coolers and thermos containers are used for these purposes .
The particles of gases are relatively far apart , so they dont bump into each other or into other things as often as the more closely spaced particles of liquids or solids .
Down-filled snowsuits , like those in the Figure 1.2 , are good thermal insulators because their feather filling traps a lot of air .
Another example of a thermal insulator is pictured in the Figure 1.3 .
The picture shows fluffy pink insulation inside the attic of a home .
The insulation helps to prevent the transfer of thermal energy into the house on hot days and out of the house on cold days .
Why do the air and sand of Death Valley feel so hot ?
Its because their particles are moving very rapidly .
Anything that is moving has kinetic energy , and the faster it is moving , the more kinetic energy it has .
The total kinetic energy of moving particles of matter is called thermal energy .
All matter has thermal energy , even matter that feels cold .
The particles of soup have greater average kinetic energy than the particles of water in the tub , explaining why the soup has a higher temperature .
This means that there are many more particles of water than soup .
Another factor also affects thermal energy .
A : The soup is boiling hot and has a temperature of 100 C , whereas the water in the tub is just comfortably warm , with a temperature of about 38 C. Although the water in the tub has a much lower temperature , it has greater thermal energy .
Radiation is the only way of transferring thermal energy that doesnt require matter .
Thermal energy from the bonfire is transferred to the hands by thermal radiation .
Thermal radiation is the transfer of thermal energy by waves that can travel through air or even through empty space , as shown in the Figure 1.1 .
When the waves of thermal energy reach objects , they transfer the energy to the objects , causing them to warm up .
This is how the fire warms the hands of someone sitting near the bonfire .
This is also how the suns energy reaches Earth and heats its surface .
Without the energy radiated from the sun , Earth would be too cold to support life as we know it .
Thermal radiation is one of three ways that thermal energy can be transferred .
The other two ways are conduction and convection , both of which need matter to transfer energy .
You might be surprised to learn that everything radiates thermal energy , not just really hot things such as the sun or a fire .
For example , when its cold outside , a heated home radiates some of its thermal energy into the outdoor environment .
A lot of thermal energy is also radiating from the edges of the windows and door .
A home that is poorly insulated radiates more energy than a home that is well insulated .
Special cameras can be used to detect radiated heat .
In the Figure 1.2 , you can see an image created by one of these cameras .
The areas that are yellow are the areas where the greatest amount of thermal energy is radiating from the home .
Even people radiate thermal energy .
Q : Where is thermal radiation radiating from the home in the picture ?
A : The greatest amount of thermal energy is radiating from the window on the upper left .
John Dalton discovered atoms in 1804 .
He thought they were the smallest particles of matter , which could not be broken down into smaller particles .
Thomson discovered that there are smaller particles within the atom .
Thomson was born in England and studied at Cambridge University , where he later became a professor .
In 1906 , he won the Nobel Prize in physics for his research on how gases conduct electricity .
In his research , Thomson passed current through a cathode ray tube , similar to the one seen in the Figure 1.2 .
Thomson tested these ideas by placing negative and positive plates along the sides of the cathode ray tube to see how the cathode ray would be affected .
The cathode ray appeared to be repelled by the negative plate and attracted by the positive plate .
This meant that the ray was negative in charge and that is must consist of particles that have mass .
He called the particles corpuscles , but they were later renamed electrons .
Thomson also measured the mass of the particles he had identified .
In short , Thomson had discovered the existence of particles smaller than atoms .
It contains a piece of metal called an electrode at each end .
This disproved Daltons claim that atoms are the smallest particles of matter .
From his discovery , Thomson also inferred that electrons are fundamental particles within atoms .
How can they be neutral if they contain negatively charged electrons ?
A : Atoms also contain positively charged particles that cancel out the negative charge of the electrons .
However , these positive particles werent discovered until a couple of decades after Thomson discovered electrons .
One electrode is negatively charged and known as a cathode .
The other electrode is positively charged and known as an anode .
When high-voltage electric current is applied to the end plates , a cathode ray travels from the cathode to the anode .
Thats what Thomson wanted to know .
Is it just a ray of energy that travels in waves like a ray of light ?
Thomson also knew that atoms are neutral in electric charge , so he asked the same question : How can atoms contain negative particles and still be neutral ?
He hypothesized that the rest of the atom must be positively charged in order to cancel out the negative charge of the electrons .
He envisioned the atom as being similar to a plum pudding , like the one pictured in the Figure 1.3 mostly positive in charge -LRB- the pudding -RRB- with negative electrons -LRB- the plums -RRB- scattered through it .
A : Today we know that all of the positive charge in an atom is concentrated in a tiny central area called the nucleus , with the electrons swirling through empty space around it , as in the Figure 1.4 .
The nucleus was discovered just a few years after Thomson discovered the electron , so the plum pudding model was soon rejected .
The girl pictured above became negatively charged because electrons flowed from the van de Graaff generator to her .
Whenever electrons are transferred between objects , neutral matter becomes charged .
This occurs even with individual atoms .
However , if atoms lose or gain electrons , they become charged particles called ions .
When an atom loses electrons , it becomes a positively charged ion , or cation .
When an atom gains electrons , it becomes a negative charged ion , or anion .
Like the formation of ions , the formation of charged matter in general depends on the transfer of electrons , either between two materials or within a material .
Three ways this can occur are referred to as conduction , polarization , and friction .
All three ways are described below .
However , regardless of how electrons are transferred , the total charge always remains the same .
Conduction occurs when there is direct contact between materials that differ in their ability to give up or accept electrons .
A van de Graff generator produces a negative charge on its dome , so it tends to give up electrons .
Human hands are positively charged , so they tend to accept electrons .
You dont need a van de Graaff generator for conduction to take place .
Wool tends to give up electrons and rubber tends to accept them .
Therefore , the carpet transfers electrons to your shoes each time you put down your foot .
The transfer of electrons results in you becoming negatively charged and the carpet becoming positively charged .
Assume that you have walked across a wool carpet in rubber-soled shoes and become negatively charged .
In this way , one end of the doorknob becomes positively charged and the other end becomes negatively charged .
This is called polarization .
Polarization occurs whenever electrons within a neutral object move because of the electric field of a nearby charged object .
Q : What happens when the negatively charged plastic rod in the diagram is placed close to the neutral metal plate ?
A : Electrons in the plate are repelled by the positive charges in the rod .
The electrons move away from the rod , causing one side of the plate to become positively charged and the other side to become negatively charged .
In the periodic table pictured in Figure known elements .
In addition to copper -LRB- Cu -RRB- , well known examples of transition metals include iron -LRB- Fe -RRB- , zinc -LRB- Zn -RRB- , silver -LRB- Ag -RRB- , and gold -LRB- Au -RRB- -LRB- Copper -LRB- Cu -RRB- is pictured in its various applications in the opening image -RRB- .
They are malleable , which means they can be shaped into sheets , and ductile , which means they can be shaped into wires .
Q : How is the number of valence electrons typically related to the properties of elements ?
A : The number of valence electrons usually determines how reactive elements are as well as the ways in which they react with other elements .
The compounds that transition metals form with other elements are often very colorful .
Some properties of transition metals set them apart from other metals .
They dont react quickly with water or oxygen , which explains why they resist corrosion .
Transition metals include the elements that are most often placed below the periodic table -LRB- the pink - and purple - shaded elements in the Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Those that follow actinium -LRB- Ac -RRB- are called actinides .
This means that they are unstable , so they decay into different , more stable elements .
A transverse wave is a wave in which particles of the medium vibrate at right angles , or perpendicular , to the direction that the wave travels .
In what directions does the string vibrate ?
A : The wave travels down the string to the end .
The string vibrates up and down at right angles to the direction of the wave .
A transverse wave is characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through .
Transverse waves called S waves occur during earthquakes .
The disturbance that causes an earthquake sends transverse waves through underground rocks in all directions away from the disturbance .
S waves may travel for hundreds of miles .
An S wave is modeled in the Figure 1.3 .
Friction is the force that opposes motion between any surfaces that are in contact .
Static , sliding , and rolling friction occur between solid surfaces .
Fluid friction occurs in liquids and gases .
All four types of friction are described below .
Thats because ice is very slippery and offers very little friction .
A : One example is the friction that helps the people climb the rock wall in the opening picture above .
Static friction keeps their hands and feet from slipping .
The pencil lead slides easily over the paper , but theres just enough friction between the pencil and paper to leave a mark .
A : There is sliding friction between the brake pads and bike rims each time you use your bikes brakes .
This friction slows the rolling wheels so you can stop .
This explains why most forms of ground transportation use wheels , including bicycles , cars , 4-wheelers , roller skates , scooters , and skateboards .
The ball bearings in this wheel reduce friction between the inner and outer cylinders when they turn .
If youve ever tried to push your open hand through the water in a tub or pool , then youve experienced fluid friction .
Look at the skydiver in the Figure 1.3 .
Hes falling toward Earth with a parachute .
Resistance of the air against the parachute slows his descent .
Uses of ultrasound include echolocation , sonar , and ultrasonography .
Animals such as bats and dolphins send out ultrasound waves and use their echoes , or reflected waves , to identify the locations of objects they can not see .
You can see in the Figure 1.1 how a bat uses echolocation to find insect prey .
Therefore , the distance from the ship to the submarine is : Q : Now assume that the sonar device on the ship sends an ultrasound wave to the bottom of the water .
If the sound wave is reflected back to the device in 4 seconds , how deep is the water ?
A : The time it takes the wave to reach the bottom is 2 seconds .
It is used to locate underwater objects such as submarines .
Thats how the ship pictured in the Figure 1.2 is using it .
It sends out ultrasound waves and detects the waves after they reflect from underwater objects .
The distance to underwater objects can be calculated from the known speed of sound in water and the time it takes for the sound waves to travel to the object .
The equation for distance traveled when speed and time are known is : Distance = Speed Time Consider the ship and submarine pictured in the Figure 1.2 .
If an ultrasound wave travels from the ship to the submarine and back again in 2 seconds , what is the distance from the ship to the submarine ?
The sound wave travels from the ship to the submarine in just 1 second , or half the time it takes to make the round trip .
You can see a doctor using ultrasound in the Figure 1.3 .
The carbon atoms in hydrocarbons may share single , double , or triple covalent bonds .
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms .
Q : Why do you suppose hydrocarbons with double or triple bonds are called unsaturated ?
A : A carbon atom always forms four covalent bonds .
Carbon atoms with double or triple bonds are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they could if they were joined only by single bonds .
This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen atoms .
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain one or more double bonds are called alkenes .
The name of a specific alkene always ends in - ene and has a prefix indicating the number of carbon atoms .
The bananas on the left were stored in a special bag that absorbs ethene .
The bananas on the right were stored without a bag .
The structural formula in the Figure Ethene is produced by most fruits and vegetables .
The Figure 1.1 show the effects of ethene on bananas .
Alkenes with the same atoms but different shapes are called isomers .
Unsaturated hydrocarbons called aromatic hydrocarbons are cyclic hydrocarbons that have double bonds .
Its structural formula is shown in the Figure 1.2 .
Larger aromatic hydrocarbons consist of two or more rings , which are joined together by bonds between their carbon atoms .
The name of aromatic hydrocarbons comes from their strong aroma , or scent .
Carbon atoms always form four covalent bonds , regardless of the atoms to which it bonds .
Unsaturated hydrocarbons that contain one or more triple bonds are called alkynes .
The names of specific alkynes always end in - yne and have a prefix for the number of carbon atoms .
The structural formula in the Figure 1.3 represents the smallest alkyne , named ethyne , which has two carbon atoms and two hydrogen atoms -LRB- C2 H2 -RRB- .
It is burned in acetylene torches , like the one pictured in the Figure 1.4 .
The flame of an acetylene torch is so hot that it can melt metal .
Cutting metal with an acetylene -LRB- ethyne -RRB- torch .
They rarely occur in ring shapes .
Like a bar magnet , planet Earth has north and south magnetic poles and a magnetic field over which it exerts magnetic force .
The sun gives off radiation in solar winds .
Notice what happens to solar winds when they reach the magnetosphere .
Radiation in solar wind would wash over Earth and kill most living things were it not for the magnetosphere .
A : Energetic particles in solar wind collide with atoms in the atmosphere over the poles , and energy is released in the form of light .
The swirling patterns of light follow lines of magnetic force in the magnetosphere .
Many animals have natural compasses that work just as well .
For example , the loggerhead turtle in the Figure 1.2 senses the direction and strength of Earths magnetic field and uses it to navigate along migration routes .
Many migratory bird species can also sense the magnetic field and use it for navigation .
Recent research suggests that they may have structures in their eyes that let them see Earths magnetic field as a visual pattern .
Valence electrons are the electrons in the outer energy level of an atom that can participate in interactions with other atoms .
Because valence electrons are so important , atoms are often represented by simple diagrams that show only their valence electrons .
These are called electron dot diagrams , and three are shown below .
In this type of diagram , an elements chemical symbol is surrounded by dots that represent the valence electrons .
Typically , the dots are drawn as if there is a square surrounding the element symbol with up to two dots per side .
A : An electron dot diagram for carbon looks like this :
The number of valence electrons in an atom is reflected by its position in the periodic table of the elements -LRB- see the periodic table in the Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Examples include hydrogen -LRB- H -RRB- , lithium -LRB- Li -RRB- , and sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- .
Examples include neon -LRB- Ne -RRB- , argon -LRB- Ar -RRB- , and krypton -LRB- Kr -RRB- .
This explains why all the elements in the same group have very similar chemical properties .
This is illustrated in the simplified periodic table in the Figure 1.2 .
The table salt pictured in the Figure 1.3 contains two elements that are so reactive they are rarely found alone in nature .
Instead , they undergo chemical reactions with other elements and form compounds .
Q : Why does chlorine accept the electron from sodium ?
It is eager to gain an extra electron to fill its outer energy level and gain stability .
Q : Find calcium -LRB- Ca -RRB- in the periodic table -LRB- see Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
Table salt is the compound named sodium chloride -LRB- NaCl -RRB- .
Based on its position in the table , how reactive do you think calcium is ?
Therefore , it is very reactive and gives up electrons in chemical reactions .
It is likely to react with an element with six valence electrons that wants to gain two electrons .
It forms when an atom of sodium -LRB- Na -RRB- gives up an electron and an atom of chlorine -LRB- Cl -RRB- accepts it .
When this happens , sodium becomes a positively charged ion -LRB- Na + -RRB- , and chlorine becomes a negatively charged ion -LRB- Cl -RRB- .
The two ions are attracted to each and join a matrix of interlocking sodium and chloride ions , forming a crystal of salt .
Q : Why does sodium give up an electron ?
It is eager to give up this electron in order to have a full outer energy level , because this will give it the most stable arrangement of electrons .
You can see how this happens in the animation at the following URL and in the Figure 1.4 .
Valence electrons also determine how wellif at allthe atoms of an element conduct electricity .
The copper wires in the cable in the Figure 1.5 are coated with plastic .
Examples include silicon and germanium in group 14 .
These elements are called semiconductors .
What happens to their valence electrons when the atoms are exposed to an electric field ?
When the atoms are exposed to an electric field , the valence electrons move away from the atoms and allow current to flow .
Copper is an excellent conductor of electricity , so it is used for wires that carry electric current .
Plastic contains mainly carbon , which can not conduct electricity , so it is used as insulation on the wires .
Q : Why do copper and carbon differ in their ability to conduct electricity ?
A : Atoms of metals such as copper easily give up valence electrons .
Their electrons can move freely and carry electric current .
Atoms of nonmetals such as the carbon , on the other hand , hold onto their electrons .
Their electrons cant move freely and carry current .
A few elements , called metalloids , can conduct electricity , but not as well as metals .
The measure of both speed and direction is called velocity .
A vector is measurement that includes both size and direction .
Vectors are often represented by arrows .
When using an arrow to represent velocity , the length of the arrow stands for speed , and the way the arrow points indicates the direction .
The arrows in the Figure 1.1 represent the velocity of three different objects .
They represent objects moving at the same speed but in different directions .
It represents an object moving at a slower speed than A or B but in the same direction as A.
Objects have the same velocity only if they are moving at the same speed and in the same direction .
Objects moving at different speeds , in different directions , or both have different velocities .
A : Although Jerods speed hasnt changed , his velocity has changed because he is moving in a different direction .
Q : How could you use vector arrows to represent Jerods velocity and how it changes ?
Look again at arrows A and B from the Figure 1.1 .
They represent objects that have different velocities only because they are moving in different directions .
A and C represent objects that have different velocities only because they are moving at different speeds .
Objects represented by B and C have different velocities because they are moving in different directions and at different speeds .
Q : Jerod is riding his bike at a constant speed .
You can calculate the average velocity of a moving object that is not changing direction by dividing the distance the object travels by the time it takes to travel that distance .
You would use this formula : velocity = distance time This is the same formula that is used for calculating average speed .
It represents velocity only if the answer also includes the direction that the object is traveling .
Tonis dog is racing down the sidewalk toward the east .
The dog travels 36 meters in 18 seconds before it stops running .
The velocity of the dog is : distance time 36 m = 18 s = 2 m/s east velocity = Note that the answer is given in the SI unit for velocity , which is m/s , and it includes the direction that the dog is traveling .
Q : What would the dogs velocity be if it ran the same distance in the opposite direction but covered the distance in 24 seconds ?
The changing velocity of the sprinteror of any other moving person or objectcan be represented by a velocity - time graph like the one in the Figure 1.1 for the sprinter .
A velocity-time graph shows how velocity changes over time .
The sprinters velocity increases for the first 4 seconds of the race , it remains constant for the next 3 seconds , and it decreases during the last 3 seconds after she crosses the finish line .
In a velocity-time graph , acceleration is represented by the slope , or steepness , of the graph line .
If the line slopes upward , like the line between 0 and 4 seconds in the Figure 1.1 , velocity is increasing , so acceleration is positive .
Negative acceleration is called deceleration .
Q : Assume that another sprinter is running the same race .
This would show that acceleration is greater during this time period for the other sprinter .
Reflection of light occurs when light bounces back from a surface that it can not pass through .
This is called regular , or specular , reflection .
In the Figure 1.1 , the smooth surface of the still water in the pond on the left reflects light in this way .
When light is reflected from a rough surface , the waves of light are reflected in many different directions , so a clear image does not form .
Transmission of light occurs when light passes through matter .
As light is transmitted , it may pass straight through matter or it may be refracted or scattered as it passes through .
When light is refracted , it changes direction as it passes into a new medium and changes speed .
The straw in the Figure 1.2 looks bent where light travels from water to air .
Scattering occurs when light bumps into tiny particles of matter and spreads out in all directions .
In the Figure air , giving the headlights a halo appearance .
A : When light passes through smoky air , it is scattered by tiny particles of soot .
Light may transfer its energy to matter rather than being reflected or transmitted by matter .
This is called absorption .
When light is absorbed , the added energy increases the temperature of matter .
If you get into a car that has been sitting in the sun all day , the seats and other parts of the cars interior may be almost too hot to touch , especially if they are black or very dark in color .
Thats because dark colors absorb most of the sunlight that strikes them .
Q : In hot sunny climates , people often dress in light-colored clothes .
A : Light-colored clothes absorb less light and reflect more light than dark-colored clothes , so they keep people cooler .
Matter can be classified on the basis of its interactions with light .
Matter may be opaque because it absorbs light , reflects light , or does some combination of both .
The shutters absorb most of the light that strikes them and reflect just a few wavelengths of visible light .
An example of each type of matter is pictured in the Figure 1.4 .
You can see clearly through transparent objects , such as the top panes of the window 1.4 , because just about all of the light that strikes them passes through to the other side .
Translucent matter is matter that transmits light but scatters the light as it passes through .
Light passes through translucent objects but you can not see clearly through them because the light is scattered in all directions .
The human eye is an organ that is specialized to collect light and focus images .
The pupil controls the amount of light that enters the eye .
It automatically gets bigger or smaller to let more or less light in as needed .
Cones can sense colors but not dim light .
How would vision be affected if the lens of the eye was concave instead of convex ?
A : A concave lens causes rays of light to diverge , or spread apart .
The sclera , also known as the white of the eye , is an opaque outer covering that protects the eye .
Therefore , a concave lens would focus the image in front of the eye , not on the retina inside the eye .
No signals would be sent to the brain so vision would not be possible .
A convex lens is thicker in the middle than at the edges and makes rays of light converge , or meet at a point .
The shape of the cornea helps focus light that enters the eye .
This ability depends on more than healthy eyes .
The brain also interprets what we are seeing .
Q : The part of the brain that processes information from the eyes is the visual cortex .
How might an injury to the visual cortex affect vision ?
A : An injury to the visual cortex might cause abnormal vision or even blindness regardless of how well the eyes can gather and focus light .
It also depends on certain parts of the brain , because the brain and eyes work together to allow us to see .
The eyes collect and focus visible light .
The lens and other structures of the eye work together to focus an image on the retina .
The image is upside-down and reduced in size , as you can see in the Figure 1.2 .
Cells in the retina change the image to electrical signals that travel to the brain through the optic nerve .
The brain interprets the electrical signals as shape , color , and brightness .
The brain does this automatically , so what we see always appears right-side up .
Usually , the problems can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses .
In many people , they can also be corrected with laser surgery , which reshapes the outer layer of the eye .
Nearsightedness , or myopia , is the condition in which nearby objects are seen clearly , but distant objects appear blurry .
This causes images to be focused in front of the retina instead of on the retina .
The lenses focus images farther back in the eye , so they fall on the retina instead of in front of it .
Q : Sometimes squinting the eyes can help someone see more clearly .
A : Squinting may improve focus by slightly changing the shape of the eyes .
When you squint , you tighten muscles around the eyes , putting pressure on the eyeballs .
Farsightedness , or hyperopia , is the condition in which distant objects are seen clearly , but nearby objects appear blurry .
This causes images to be focused in a spot that would fall behind the retina -LRB- if light could pass through the retina -RRB- .
The lenses focus images farther forward in the eye , so they fall on the retina instead of behind it .
He can probably see the TV more clearly than the words in a book because the TV is farther away .
Waves that travel through mattersuch as the fabric of a flagare called mechanical waves .
The matter they travel through is called the medium .
When the energy of a wave passes through the medium , particles of the medium move .
The distance the particles move is measured by the waves amplitude .
A : Wave amplitude is determined by the energy of the disturbance that causes the wave .
The Figure 1.1 show the amplitudes of two different types of waves : transverse and longitudinal waves .
In a transverse wave , particles of the medium move up and down at right angles to the direction of the wave .
In a longitudinal wave , particles of the medium move back and forth in the same direction as the wave .
A wave caused by a disturbance with more energy has greater amplitude .
Imagine dropping a small pebble into a pond of still water .
Tiny ripples will move out from the disturbance in concentric circles .
Now imagine throwing a big boulder into the pond .
Very large waves will be generated by the disturbance .
The number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time is wave frequency .
Wave frequency can be measured by counting the number of crests -LRB- high points -RRB- of waves that pass the fixed point in 1 second or some other time period .
The SI unit for wave frequency is the hertz -LRB- Hz -RRB- , where 1 hertz equals 1 wave passing a fixed point in 1 second .
The frequency of a wave is the same as the frequency of the vibrations that caused the wave .
For example , to generate a higher-frequency wave in a rope , you must move the rope up and down more quickly .
This takes more energy , so a higher-frequency wave has more energy than a lower-frequency wave with the same amplitude .
Unlike blocks that we know , these building blocks are incredibly small .
You built some shape using the many different sized and shaped blocks .
This is much like how atoms combine to become everything we know .
If we took only one size and shape of block and put them together , we would make a pure substance .
Atoms still have the same properties as the elements they make up .
This means they are not mixed with anything else .
Pure substances such as nickel , hydrogen , and helium make up all kinds of matter .
Consider this : trillions of atoms would fit inside the period at the end of this sentence .
Although atoms are very tiny , they consist of even smaller particles .
Atoms are made of protons , neutrons , and electrons : Protons have a positive charge .
Models help scientists make sense of things .
This simple model helps scientists think about the atom .
Remember , a model helps us make sense of things .
When two or more waves meet , they interact with each other .
The interaction of waves with other waves is called wave interference .
Wave interference may occur when two waves that are traveling in opposite directions meet .
How amplitude is affected by wave interference depends on the type of interference .
Constructive interference occurs when the crests , or highest points , of one wave overlap the crests of the other wave .
You can see this in the Figure 1.1 .
Destructive interference occurs when the crests of one wave overlap the troughs , or lowest points , of another wave .
The Figure 1.2 shows what happens .
As the waves pass through each other , the crests and troughs cancel each other out to produce a wave with zero amplitude .
Waves may reflect off an obstacle that they are unable to pass through .
When waves are reflected straight back from an obstacle , the reflected waves interfere with the original waves and create standing waves .
These are waves that appear to be standing still .
Standing waves occur because of a combination of constructive and destructive interference .
Q : How could you use a rope to produce standing waves ?
When the waves reach the fixed object , they are reflected back .
The original waves and the reflected waves interfere to produce a standing wave .
Try it yourself and see if the waves appear to stand still .
Electromagnetic radiation , commonly called light , is the transfer of energy by waves called electromagnetic waves .
These waves consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields .
It is released when electrons return to lower energy levels in atoms .
Electromagnetic radiation behaves like continuous waves of energy most of the time .
Sometimes , however , electromagnetic radiation seems to behave like discrete , or separate , particles rather than waves .
So does electromagnetic radiation consist of waves or particles ?
This question about the nature of electromagnetic radiation was debated by scientists for more than two centuries , starting in the 1600s .
Some scientists argued that electromagnetic radiation consists of particles that shoot around like tiny bullets .
Other scientists argued that electromagnetic radiation consists of waves , like sound waves or water waves .
Until the early 1900s , most scientists thought that electromagnetic radiation is either one or the other and that scientists on the other side of the argument were simply wrong .
In 1905 , the physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation .
The theory is often called the wave-particle theory .
It explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle .
Einstein argued that when an electron returns to a lower energy level and gives off electromagnetic energy , the energy is released as a discrete packet of energy .
According to Einstein , a photon resembles a particle but moves like a wave .
The theory posits that waves of photons traveling through space or matter make up electromagnetic radiation .
Instead , the amount of energy in a photon depends on the frequency of the electromagnetic wave .
The frequency of a wave is the number of waves that pass a fixed point in a given amount of time , such as the number of waves per second .
After Einstein proposed his theory , evidence was discovered to support it .
For example , scientists shone laser light through two slits in a barrier made of a material that blocked light .
Using a special camera that was very sensitive to light , they took photos of the light that passed through the slits .
The photos revealed tiny pinpoints of light passing through the double slits .
This seemed to show that light consists of particles .
However , if the camera was exposed to the light for a long time , the pinpoints accumulated in bands that resembled interfering waves .
Therefore , the experiment showed that light seems to consist of particles that act like waves .
Wave speed -LRB- and speed in general -RRB- can be represented by the equation : Speed = Distance Time
Wavelength is the distance between two correspond - ing points on adjacent waves .
This equation shows how the three factors are related : Speed = Wavelength x Wave Frequency In this equation , wavelength is measured in meters and frequency is measured in hertz -LRB- Hz -RRB- , or number of waves per second .
Therefore , wave speed is given in meters per second , which is the SI unit for speed .
A : Increasing the wavelength of a wave doesnt change its speed .
Thats because when wavelength increases , wave frequency decreases .
The equation for wave speed can be used to calculate the speed of a wave when both wavelength and wave frequency are known .
The speed of the wave is : Speed = 3 m x 1 wave/s = 3 m/s Q : Kim made a wave in a spring by pushing and pulling on one end .
A : Substitute these values into the equation for speed : Speed = 0.1 m x 2 waves/s = 0.2 m/s
The equation for wave speed -LRB- above -RRB- can be rewritten as : Frequency = Speed Wavelength or Wavelength = Speed Frequency Therefore , if you know the speed of a wave and either the wavelength or wave frequency , you can calculate the missing value .
For example , suppose that a wave is traveling at a speed of 2 meters per second and has a wavelength of 1 meter .
A : Substitute these values into the equation for wavelength : Wavelength = 2m/s 2waves/s = 1m
The speed of most waves depends on the medium , or the matter through which the waves are traveling .
Generally , waves travel fastest through solids and slowest through gases .
When particles are farther apart , it takes longer for the energy of the disturbance to pass from particle to particle through the medium .
Wavelength is one way of measuring the size of waves .
It is the distance between two corresponding points on adjacent waves , and it is usually measured in meters .
The wavelength of a transverse wave can be measured as the distance between two adjacent crests , or high points , as shown in the Figure 1.1 .
In a longitudinal wave , particles of matter vibrate back and forth in the same direction that the wave travels .
The wavelength of a longitudinal wave can be measured as the distance between two adjacent compressions , as shown in the Figure 1.2 .
The wavelength of a wave is related to the waves energy .
-LRB- Amplitude is a measure of how far particles of the medium move up and down or back and forth when a wave passes through them . -RRB-
A wedge is simple machine that consists of two inclined planes , giving it a thin end and thick end , as you can see in the Figure 1.1 .
A wedge is used to cut or split apart objects .
Force is applied to the thick end of the wedge , and the wedge , in turn , applies force to the object along both of its sloping sides .
This force causes the object to split apart .
In the Figure 1.2 , a knife is being used to chop tough pecans .
The very thin edge of the blade easily enters and cuts through the pecans .
A wedge applies more force to the object -LRB- output force -RRB- than the user applies to the wedge -LRB- input force -RRB- , so the mechanical advantage of a wedge is greater than 1 .
With all wedges , the trade-off is that the output force is applied over a shorter distance , so force may need to be applied to the wedge repeatedly to push it through the object .
A wheel and axle is a simple machine that consists of two connected rings or cylinders , one inside the other .
Both rings or cylinders turn in the same direction around a single center point .
The inner ring or cylinder is called the axle , and the outer one is called the wheel .
In a wheel and axle , force may be applied either to the wheel or to the axle .
A wheel and axle does not change the direction of the input force .
However , the force put out by the machine , called the output force , is either greater than the input force or else applied over a greater distance .
In a doorknob , the force is applied to the wheel by a persons hand .
The mechanical advantage of a machine is the factor by which the machine changes the input force .
A wheel and axle may either increase or decrease the input force , depending on whether the input force is applied to the axle or the wheel .
When the input force is applied to the axle , as it is with a Ferris wheel , the wheel turns with less force .
However , the wheel turns over a greater distance , so it turns faster than the axle .
When the input force is applied to the wheel , as it is with a doorknob , the axle turns over a shorter distance but with greater force , so the mechanical advantage is greater than 1 .
This allows you to turn the doorknob with relatively little effort , while the axle of the doorknob applies enough force to slide the bar into or out of the doorframe .
Like the real Earth , the globe pictured above is a magnet .
The magnetic field is an area around Earth that is affected by its magnetic field .
He used a spherical magnet to represent Earth .
With a compass , he demonstrated that it the spherical magnet causes a compass needle to behave the same way that Earth causes a compass needle to behave .
This showed that a spherical magnet is a good model for Earth and therefore that Earth is a magnet .
In the early 1900s , scientists started using seismographic data to learn about Earths inner structure .
A seismograph detects and measure earthquake waves .
Evidence from earthquakes showed that Earth has a solid inner core and a liquid outer core -LRB- see the Figure 1.1 -RRB- .
The outer core consists of molten metals , mainly iron and nickel .
Scientists think that Earths magnetic field is generated by the movement of charged particles through these molten metals in the outer core .
The teens who are playing basketball in the picture above are using force to move their bodies and the basketball , so they are doing work .
The teen who is studying isnt moving anything , so she isnt doing work .
The Figure 1.1 illustrates this point .
Q : If the box the man is carrying is very heavy , does he do any work as he walks across the room with it ?
A : Regardless of the weight of the box , the man does no work on it as he holds it while walking across the room .
To see the effects of force and distance on work , compare the weight lifters in the Figure 1.2 .
The two weight lifters on the left are lifting the same amount of weight , but the one on the bottom is lifting the weight a greater distance .
The two weight lifters on the bottom right are both lifting the weight the same distance , but the weight lifter on the left is lifting a heavier weight , so she is doing more work .
